Thank you.
So we got the first submitter. Julie?
Uh, good morning, Julie.
Good morning. Julie
Kda. Can you hear me?
Yes, we can hear you now. Thank you.
Thank you. Are you good to go? Is everyone ready?
Yes, I believe so. Um, let me just double quick check.
Um, you do have 10 minutes, and the fourth is yours.
Thank you so much. Thank you.
So many clicks to get involved.
Uh, Chi everyone.
I'm presenting today on behalf of Perko Tribal Authority
as an alternate to Mr.
Aki, who is involved with the management of the Tonga.
My name is Julie Shepherd.
Uh, PERKO stands opposed
to the Healthy Futures PAA Amendment Bill 2025.
Mm-hmm. And our view,
this bill represents a fundamental attack on Maori Wright's
leadership and health equity.
It dismantles TE based
and equity focused provisions of the original PAA Act.
By repealing the health sector principles
and the New Zealand Health Charter,
it removes explicit commitments to
equity and culturally responsive care.
The bill eliminates requirements for Maori expertise
and partnership at every level of health governance,
reducing Maori roles to me, advisory positions
with no real power or accountability.
This is not partnership.
It is exclusion and marginalization.
The bill enables Health New Zealand to co to collaborate
with private healthcare providers opening the door
to further privatization
and the diversion of public resources
away from the kopa Maori and community-based services.
It centralizes control
through Minister appointed committees removes independent
oversight such as audit, general audits,
and weakens obligations to monitor
and report on Maori health outcomes.
The new targets in the government policy statement are
generic and do nothing
to address the persistent inequities faced by Maori
of particular concern.
The bill of given effect makes amendments
to treaty settlement legislation, including PU
or NUI Act 2025 without the explicit consent
of affected HAPU or Iwi.
This may appear to be a technical provision,
however, it is a breach
of constitutional convention treaty principles
and good faith and risks, significant legal, political
and reputational consequences for the Crown.
I also draw the Select Committee's attention
to the current high court challenge
regarding the disestablishment of Taka Fa order
in early 2024,
the National Lead Coalition government just established Teka
order the Maori Health Authority under urgency passing
legislation in a matter of hours
and preventing a TGI Tribunal hearing from taking
place before the decision.
While the bill does not itself explicitly disestablish the
Maori Health Authority, it entrenches
and extends the removal of Maori leadership and health.
The court is now considering whether the process
and legislation dissolving to AFA order breached
TGI a case with potentially far reaching implications
for treaty law and the Crown Maori relationship.
In our view, it's time to cancel, cancel this upheaval
and end the cycle of continual changes
that leave Maori health.
In a state of uncertainty,
the select Committee must not allow Maori health
to be treated as a, as a political football subject
to the whims of changing governments.
The inequity of health for Maori must not continue
to be compromised.
We are the original people of this land, and our health
and wellbeing also deserve stability, respect,
and enduring commitment.
Not more disrupt, not more disruption, and disregard.
The Select Committee should halt progress on this bill
and ensure that Maori health is no longer undermined
by political expediency.
In summary, it is our view that this bill is a regressive
assimilationist measures that strips Maori rights, voice
and protection in the health system.
It breaches Ang and the Crown's obligation to Maori.
We urge the select committee to reject this bill in full.
Thank you for your time and, um, open to any questions.
Sorry, I can't hear you there.
I'm sorry. Yes. Thank you for that.
Uh, we've got a question from our member from hoa.
Thank You. Uh, thank you very much, Julie,
for providing, um, your submission this morning for, um,
I'm one thing to explore with you.
So in terms of where your tribal is, can you explain
to us some of the constraints
and the barriers to accessing, um, quality,
timely equitable health services
that your tribal members would experience in your,
Um, is a rural
and involves kiwi fruit, for example.
And with that, um, the usage
of hydrogen cyanide, which is a, a product called hie,
which is known to have carcinogen effects.
So, uh, through the research, our HO water tells us
that during the HIE application season between July
to September, that there's heightened respiratory issues,
uh, which can also be associated
with colds in the, in the winter season.
However, access to, um, doctors,
we have a ho water here.
Um, if we want a appointment at our ho water,
we are waiting 10 to 14 days minimum to get an appointment.
I have two Mouna, uh, four months old
and two years old, uh, who also get flus.
It's hiking season right now, and it's the same for them.
You know, my daughter, a first time mom with two babies, um,
you know, has this real sense
of panic when she can't get into the doctors.
And of course, if you want to head to town
and, uh, you know, go to a private healthcare, you know,
that's, that's a hundred dollars.
And same with hospitals mean my son-in-law, you know, he has
his accident prone and is often at the a and e.
Um, I've been through breast cancer
and I have to say under the previous government,
when I was diagnosed in 2019 with breast cancer,
healthcare was supreme in comparison to what it is today.
So we do have issues with healthcare provisions
and uh, for us the view is the consistency of,
um, minister Brown and his
or the parties, the coalition parties desire
to privatize is doing nothing to help
UA like ourselves in that situation.
We can't afford private health.
We can't even afford the insurance payments.
So how is that providing equity to Maori it, it's just not.
So there's a lot behind that.
And, um, TKA order was, you know, it was
a, a golden cellis of hope for Maori.
And here we are, the stripping back,
this con continual stripping back of UA
and, uh, rights established, already established
and, um, required under treaty settlements, uh,
being compromised continually
and challenged as if they never existed,
as if those rights aren't real,
as if there's no legal challenge to come
for this government, um, when there is examples of
that already happening in multiple spheres.
I don't know if that really answers your question,
but that's certainly what I had to say about it.
Alright, thank you. Um, yes, Cameron,
Nixon, you've got a question or
I thank you, chair. I was worried
about time, but I
will ask a question if I can.
Sure. Go ahead. Uh, thank you Julie for bringing your,
um, yeah, the pu uh, submission
and also your own experience to this, uh, conversation
and, and what's happening with this bill.
I, uh, I was gonna ask about how you find, um, the changes
with, uh, uh, the MANA area, um, now involving the
ANA area and how you think that these changes are,
are affecting the ability to, uh, supply medical services
to the people in the, in the Greater Bay, plenty area.
But I do want to ask, um,
after you raise that, uh, that point about legal challenges,
uh, with my colleague who Hannah Linden, um, has, has, uh,
Peter Hapu, uh, got any, uh, legal advice,
uh, based on the PU
or NUI Act, uh, the Settlement Act that we recently, uh,
passed through the house, have you had any advice, um,
legally from legal professionals about steps that
KU Tribal Authority might take?
So in terms of steps that we might take, we have a, uh,
ad dedicated, uh, settlement governance entity.
But what that, um, settlement Act provides for is all
of its hapu, 'cause it's a hapu centric settlement.
And what that, um, ACT provides for is for all
of those hapu entities.
So we are certainly taking a raft of leko information, all
of the hapu that are involved.
But, um, as, as far as, uh, the legal challenges in relation
to, um, technical changes to, um, any,
any acts under treaty settlements, um, is there needs
to be a clear communicative process
when any amendment is made to a full
and final settlement, right?
So, uh, those legal challenges are, are something,
but the legal challenges that I spoke about
and that the submission talks about is the behavior
of this government, um, kicking Maori rights in the guts
and, um, UA
or iwi Maori having the ability to challenge many
of these decisions through court processes.
I'm not sure if I asked answered your question,
but this is Beate. Thank you, Julie,
Thank you for asking. Thank you for
your submission. Julie, thank you so much.
And now we got Uha Butler on, um, to,
to submit her oral submission.
Good afternoon. You got 10 minutes and
One of,
Um, uh, called England.
So I'm a Maori physiotherapist with a number of, uh,
different heads across the health system in New Zealand, um,
with postgraduate expertise
and health systems, um, systems thinking and health policy.
Um, and I'm here today to support, um, today astu to, uh,
A grassroots movement based in Christchurch.
We parents, artists, activists,
educators, environmental and community workers
who believe in a based future.
We were born from the need to respond
to the growing threats, to threats not only in
policy but in practice.
Our movement is grounded in solidarity collective action
and stands firmly in
opposition to the payor amendment bill.
We oppose the bill in its entirety
as it represents a significant step backwards in the journey
towards genuine and upholding
and the health and wellbeing of Maori and Pacific and ot.
And across al the first one we wanna, um,
address is we've been blindsided
and forgotten, no genuine con consultation in ot.
This bill has proceeded without any meaningful consult
consultation with Hapu Iwi Maori health providers
or the Wau as
and residents of Christchurch.
We were not approached, invite or nor invited to Ang
or given the opportunity to participate in any pre
consultation process.
We feel blindsided and forgotten.
This lack of consultation is not a procedural failure.
It is a breach of principles of partnership
and participation under te.
It is also a breach of crown's responsibility
to ensure Maori have a voice in decisions
that directly impact the Ang.
And
So just on that note, um, in relation to this bill,
previous bill was in policy, um,
particularly following the initial three month period, um,
uh, front the, the, um, the coalition being in power
is that, um, if we look back on specific bills
and policy, we can see a recurrent theme
of decreased engagement
and abusive executive power, which is perpetuating
and reinforcing inequity, that Maori experience.
So this is the word, equity is an important thing
to consider in the context because health system
and it's by which we
very effectiveness the manner of our health system.
Um, so it's a very important thing to consider
whenever we are going to alter
and amend, um, our current health system, our health policy,
and our health legislation.
What is also significant in New Zealand is the gap between,
um, the pay, uh, legislation, which was a
originally I I believe in 2022,
was largely well put together to, to address inequity.
But the gap between,
and that the policy of the coal phase
and its impact on population health is wide
and that gap has widened directly as a result of this lack
of engagement and abuse and executive power.
Particularly from an equity perspective,
The impacts on Maori
and Pacific Wau, uh, the compounding inequities
au are already navigating a challenging landscape
of intergenerational inequity trauma and systemic racism.
The pile amendment bill threatens to deepen
existing disparities across health.
Maori and Pacific whanau suffer disproportionate rates
of diabetes, heart disease, cancer
and mental health distress access to cultural safe care
and Copa Maori services is also limited.
This bill weakens the structure that gave space
for Maori governance and voice within the system.
This disbandment of weakening of the Maori Health Authority
erodes a platform that aim
to address systemic bias in the mainstream system.
Um, so there's a number of concerns there, particular
around the amendment bill
and how that relates to, um, population health outcomes
for Maori, um, particularly from an equity perspective.
And I I, there's a number of points,
but I'm just gonna speak to three in particular.
So the first of those three points is, um, has to do
with private part, um, public partnership.
Now looking at the global research on this
and looking at the context of New Zealand, this, um,
given the level of, uh,
inequity across the New Zealand health system, not dealing
with that before we look at private part, um,
public partnership is more likely than not going to, uh,
reinforce and perpetuate that inequity.
Um, the second point is that, um,
the concern around clause 19, um,
in particular amendment to the sections, uh, 29
and 30, concerning the Iwi Maori partnership board, um,
and the newly appointed holder Maori advisory, um, uh,
group is that let's remove specific requirements relating
to accountability, monitoring, reporting,
investment and innovation,
which is five out the seven aspects
of the I Maori partnership board we're responsible for.
And it's likely going to increase, um, an equity, um,
of health access and outcomes for Maori.
Um, the third point, um,
is that I'm also concerned, um, that clause 16, uh,
amendment to section 16 will remove specific Health
New Zealand obligations relating to the principles of ity
COPA Maori services, cultural safety
and responsiveness of services, MA Maori
and Maori perspectives of services leading
to further increase in equity from
Maori across the health system.
So the realities of t have been ignored in the amendment.
Bill T is city still healing from trauma, earthquakes,
MOS attacks and housing crisis,
and the compounding effects of COVID-19 Maori here
face inadequate access to Maori health services
and support urban poverty
and marginalization in areas like lack
of sourcing for and iwi initiatives in Canterbury.
This bill does not have nothing to acknowledge
or address these localized conditions.
Instead, it seeks to recentralize decision making
and remove critical pathways to local iwi led solutions.
ATU and the MANA must be upheld.
Our ATU are the PO of UA of our communities.
They carry the wisdom of generations, the real tikanga
and MAGA essential to our survival.
This bill by sidelining Maori governance
and decision making in the health system
disregards the manner of and their right to lead advises
and be cared for in a way that upholds their dignity.
Currently, our whanau, our atu, are being told in hospital
that they cannot, um, use too many mos, that they,
if they pee too much in the mo, that the government,
um, has to fund that.
So our whanau, our UR, are being forced to
urinate in these mollies all day
and not being supported correctly in their hospital system
and a system that they don't trust so they will not access.
And these are life stories
that are happening right now in also tahi.
Yeah, so this highlights a really good point is
that we're already working inside a system
with the significant issues
with cultural safety and competency.
Um, and the experiences of Maori, um, along
with many other factors, uh, are negatively impacting access
and experiences and outcomes, uh, in our health system.
Um, further to the, to the points previously, um, that
looking at what we need to address health
and population health for Maori is that
the revoking of the health sector principles, um,
appears directly counterproductive to the five gps
or government policy statement on health priorities relating
to non-clinical disease prevention,
partnering on health determinants in in
high need populations.
So once again, we're drifting away from first
and foremost being focused on population
need and how we achieve that.
What we are doing with this, um, proposed bill, uh,
seeks to widen the gap, um, um,
in terms of not meeting that need.
So increasing inequity.
Thank you so much. I think it's over 10 minutes now.
Can you summarize in one sentence
or just, just last sentence?
If you wanna make any, any porn. Yeah.
Yeah. So this bill does not serve the people.
It does not serve the, it does not serve or honor.
We urge this committee to reject in in its full to.
Alright. Thank you so much for your submission.
Now we got, um, on the, on, on the submitter.
Hi Tanya, you are on.
Yes, good afternoon.
Can you hear us all right? You got five minutes.
And the is yours.
Um, every one of you will be remembered
by what you decide for.
I speak as a practitioner with over 30 years in services
across all of my iwi with Bernardos Wang
Police and Health.
I'm currently a change lead for Ang
across primary and community health.
And I've recently rejoined man as a systems lead
with a focus on health and a CC.
I'm here to state plainly I oppose the removal
of the health principles and the health charter.
They have been game changers
and as highlighted by Theresa in her submission before me.
Removing them is a step backwards.
Our tamari, our children
and young people make up nearly a third of our population.
They will carry the co la longest consequences
of your decisions.
Maori and Pacific Tamari are still being hospitalized
with preventable illness far more than others.
One in five ranta live with high psychological distress.
Suicide is their leading cause of death.
Disabled and neurodiverse, tamari wait years for assessment
and care and their whanau are exhausted.
Without the principles, equity protections vanish.
Without the charter workforce culture
and quality standards erode.
We know that it is the system that shapes practice.
These changes strip away safeguards
and return us to a siloed medicalized model.
They intensify invisibility for the vulnerable
widen inequity and amount to systemic neglect.
They also breach our obligations under
the UN convention on the rights of the child
and the convention on the rights of persons
with disabilities.
In my career, I have discharged professionals
from care plans when they failed Tam and their whanau.
If you ignore the evidence
and continue with amendments that we know will cause harm,
then we will have no choice
but to discharge you from your duty to this nation
and to every to.
So I'm asking you not as politicians bound by a party line,
but as parents, as grandparents,
and as whanau yourselves,
what decision do you want to be remembered for?
Will you be heroes for the future?
Or the generation remembered
for turning your backs on our tam
Tam Deserve better, deserve, better
Question from, uh,
And recognizing the important work
that you've done in the infrastructure of, uh, delivery
of health services on the East Coast
and being chair of our Iwi Maori partnership board,
um, in little here too.
Um, your voice is important
and adds, um, further weight to, um,
these structural changes, uh, which are coming at us thick
and fast in the health system in terms of Temo Law
and the health charter and thinking about our crime.
'cause I was just at the, this morning
with our striking nurses
and healthcare workers, they were really clear
that the health charter was something that was developed
by them, with them, with the community, with the sector.
Their voices felt heard
and that Paya was giving effect to their worries,
concerns about an effective safe workplace
and the culture that organizations
and entities were required, um, to have, um, for them as.
And so they feel muzzled, um, from your perspective
and knowing the important place of the health charter
as well as the health sector principles,
if we don't prioritize them in legislation,
do we risk unbundling the journey to date
that many organizations have made
and thinking that, oh, they're already doing that now.
We don't need to have it in legislation.
Do you think if it's not explicit, people won't do it?
Yeah, I, um, I was fortunate enough to be a part
of the discussions for te So,
and it was on the back of COVID.
My biggest concern was during COVID, our staff,
our workforce, our health workforce were trashed.
We did not treat them properly and
because of that, they were not able to deliver appropriate
and proper care to Al, Al and au.
So being a part of the discussions in
was actually it was liberating.
Um, I'm a practitioner within the system,
so it was also reaffirm the fact we knew what to do.
We know our job, we know how to deliver good healthcare,
but we have a system that constantly continuously tells us,
you dunno what you're doing.
But actually, in fact, during COVID we demonstrated it.
You turned the system off in Wellington
and we were able to act.
We did what we had to.
We kept our whanau home and we kept them safe
and well, unfortunately we did lose families across the
nation, but that's a part of the learning.
And the biggest learning that we got through developing was
that we had to back each other up.
We had to be there to support one another
and we needed our leaders to do so as well.
Alright, thank you for your submission.
We are way over the top.
So thank you for all for your submission.
Now we have a link submitted from
Stop Institutional Racism.
Good afternoon, you guys. Can you hear me?
Yes, I can hear you now. You've got 10 minutes and the
Force, force is yours?
Yes. Is Clive here yet or
Yes, I'm here. Yes,
whatever you want. Do
You, do you wanna go first? Clive?
Uh, I'm Clive Aspen
and uh, I would just like to introduce my colleague, uh, Dr.
Elizabeth. Do you wanna say hello? Uh, Alper
Kia.
Kia. Oh, uh, my name's Dr. Sper Frasca.
I'm a senior medical officer at, um, in emergency medicine,
um, previous director of emergency medicine training
and Deputy center for the Australian
College for Emergency Medicine.
So we represent Stu, which is a group
of public health activists who are committed
to ensuring equity in the health system.
We oppose the provisions proposed in this bill
because fundamentally it will wind us back generations.
I grew up on a small dairy farm in Hoki in
the 1950s and sixties.
My Maori mother discouraged me from speaking
to our Maori and her mother.
My grandmother told me never to marry a Maori.
I obeyed them both.
I today live with my male partner of 32 years,
who was a sixth generation Australian,
and I have struggled
to become a proficient speaker today on Maori
for most of my adult life.
We came back to live in New Zealand eight years ago
because we were excited by the prospects
of the new government and the transformative
policies they were supporting.
Today I work at AKA Victoria University,
where I'm an associate professor in health.
I have worked in schools and universities for five decades,
and I've seen the disadvantage
and marginalization experience by young Maori
and the wider Maori community.
Today I conduct research into ran Tahi suicide.
And as some of you will know, young Maori experienced some
of the highest rates of suicide in the world.
Indeed, the previous speaker just referred to that.
We live with some of the most shameful disparities
and experienced by indigenous people anywhere in the world.
I teach university students about
how Maori Maori health policy
and strategic approaches to achieving equity.
One postgraduate course I have designed and taught
and teach is called Paya, which is named after the act
and attracts much attention, much interest
and enrollments keep increasing year by year.
My students have provided me
with feedback on the stir submission
and I have included these insights in this submission.
My colleagues and I are preparing our students
to move into the workforce as to decision makers
and change agents in Maori health.
My students along with me are opposed to this bill.
We are excited with the passing.
We were excited with the passing into legislation
of the Piora Act in my 50 years of professional life.
This act, in its previous iteration marked some
of the significant progress in our approaches
to addressing Maori health disadvantage.
The impact of discriminatory treatment in my whanau
and in my, among my friends and peers is significant.
My aunts and uncles never made it to 80.
As you know, the life expectancy in this country is about
84 for most people.
Like many Maori, they were robbed of the years of life
that most New Zealanders get to enjoy.
My mother died at 79, my sister-in-law at 53,
and my friend Glenis at 64.
Everywhere I look, I see disparities
and I'm constantly reminded of the life expectancy gap
of 7.5 years.
Like my friends and family,
I've experienced discrimination in the health system
and the passing of the Pie Order Act gave me great hope
for the future of Maori health
and the creation of our health system
that guaranteed equitable outcome outcomes for everyone,
not just for the well off
or the few who could afford to access healthcare as
and when they needed it, as well as working in universities.
I've also worked within, in government most notably,
and the Health Quality and Safety Commission,
I have seen firsthand how policy is designed and developed
and then implemented and
how often it misses the mark when it comes
to addressing Maori health disparities.
My most notable government role was when I was seconded to
order for a six month secondment
before its disestablishment.
I was charged with leading the development
of the new agency's research agenda
as the minister at the time said this was a once in
a lifetime opportunity.
It was a chance to address racism in our health system,
as he said, and to build a health system that was respons
that responded to the disparities based on the articles
of kaa.
And I saw firsthand the tremendous
progress that was achieved by TKA FA order.
There was overwhelming community support from across the
country, despite what some politicians said,
TKA FA order was not a Wellington centric bureaucracy.
Rather, it had a stronghold in South Auckland
with its large Maori and Pacific population.
And the level of buyout wasn't significant.
And this was epitomized by the establishment
of Iwi Maori partnership boards,
which quickly enjoyed strong community support in those
localities where they were first set up the watering down
of the equity provision, the Highwater Act will set us back
generations, and in my eyes
and those of my colleagues,
this constitutes a missed opportunity
of mammoth proportions.
As the American writer h Jackson Brown Junior has said,
nothing is more expensive than a missed opportunity.
The watering down of the Pie Order Act, the disestablishment
of TKA fight order in particular,
constitutes a serious missed opportunity.
It will take generations to overcome.
If this bill proceeds,
I will still teach the course on pie order,
but I'll have to take a different tack.
Instead of looking to the future with optimism,
we will now have to focus on what could have been.
I'll also be able to tell students about other countries
such as Canada and Australia,
which have significant indigenous populations
and which have agencies that are set up
to address indigenous health and social disparities.
Unlike New Zealand Stir urges the committee
to withdraw the bill and to start afresh
with a co-designed amendment package developed
with Maori health leaders, iwi Maori partnership boards
and Hapu and the public health sectors.
And with that, I'd like to pass it over to my colleague, Dr.
Kira.
Kira, I just want to back up a lot of what Clive has said
and to provide a picture of
how this is all put into practice.
Every day in our hospitals, in the roles that I've held,
I've spent a lot of time educating
and training junior doctors, statistically 43%
of which are international medical graduates.
That's the highest proportion
among all the OECD doctors countries.
When those doctors walk onto our shop floor,
they're interacting with the patient population that's
around 25% Maori universally.
When I've worked with those trainees, many of them have no
or minimal understanding of the history of Arturo.
Why would they? They are majority British.
So when they're learning about concepts like Maori health
beliefs, our colonial history,
power dynamics in the consultation room
and implicit bias, they've often never discussed this before
and they find it vital to how they practice as a doctor.
So if we turn to look at, say, Middlemore Hospital,
it's constantly in the news.
In May there was 1,500 patients treated
in hospital corridors.
This patient's waiting in excess of 12 hours to be seen.
Middlemore is considered to health practitioners often
as the canary in the cold mine,
and it often highlights a true status
of our healthcare system.
Over 50% of EDUs at Middlemore Hospital are Mor Pacifica.
So it's that demographic
that's d disproportionately waiting in the corridors,
sitting on the floor of a crowded waiting room
or even sitting in their cars waiting for healthcare.
And those are the patients
that will be most affected by this bill.
It will be those patients who we desperately need
to interact with the healthcare system whose trust will be
eroded, whose representatives at a regional level are not
heard and will no longer be seen by doctors who are trained
to understand the cultural aspects of their care.
So to me, the repeal of the aspects
of the PIORA bill is counterintuitive
and counterproductive
to establishing quality healthcare in New Zealand.
Thank you for hearing our submission
and we urge you to reject this bill
for the sake of our patients. Thank you. Thank you.
We got question from I don't have a question, Mr.
Chair, I've thank you so much.
Um, and thank you for continuing to, um, promote, um, PA
as a part of, um, the skills
and learning for our health
practitioners now and into the future.
Maybe a quick question if I have time is about, uh,
how do we, uh, look to pro, how,
what's your advice in providing some stability
to the health sector in terms of, um, the seesaw that we see
as we move from site to site?
Do you recommend that the select committee needs to look at
that and provide some stability to the health sector
and to, in terms of how our health delivery is, um,
is sent out into the community and across the tu?
Look, it's great to see you there on the screen
and, um, thank you for coming
and talking to our class earlier this year
because one of the great things about being in Wellington is
we can call upon significant talent like yourself to come
and talk to the students and they become energized
and they become optimistic for the future.
And I think that is the mark feature
of the Maori community of this country.
We have lived through significant challenges.
We have seen stuff like this happening in the past.
We will get through this
and we've gotta continue to have that sense of optimism
because we know that it will get better.
It's tragic to think that we are going back a few steps,
however, we must be optimistic
and think we will get over this
and we'll return to those days when things like p occupy
order, when people come to realize that significant progress
and benefit can be made from having an organization like PKA
order and act like PI order in its full, uh,
in its full status mite, uh, uh, KIAA,
Thank you so much has this up now.
So thank you so much for submission.
Now we got the link submitter. Um, Dr. White,
Thank you for the opportunity to speak
to our submission on
N Wright Public
and here we have myself, Dr.
Do Coffee and Man Prickett here today.
So we're representing New Zealand Climate and Health Council
and speaks for over 1000 health workers
and organizations who want to see health, health equity,
climate and social issues addressed in a cohesive manner.
And we're coalition with many
of the large national health bodies
and our membership base makes us the biggest health
and climate focused organization in.
So we have a really clear mandate from the health sector
to speak on issues like this that affect health,
that affect health at both an individual patient
level and a broader level.
So audit tile is opposed
to the changes outlined in this bill.
We've got two major problems with it.
I'll explain the first and I'll pass the term for the second
and he'll introduce himself.
Then we'll try to leave time for questions too.
Um, so we need, we need you to know
that this amendment is really ripping the guts
out of our health system.
It's doing this in part
by repealing the health sector principles and cause nine,
and this is major issue one.
So we can treat human health in a number of ways
and a health system will treat disease,
but a good health system will actively
prevent sickness from happening.
So when someone is allowed to get very sick,
we might meet them at the bottom
of a cliff with an ambulance.
This is important because some people will get sick,
but a lot of the sickness can be prevented if we stop people
going off the cliff in the first place if we put fences up
and if we have pathways guiding them down the hill.
But this bill is making the cliff more slippery.
It's chopping the fence down
and it's barricading the safe pathways.
So soon we're gonna have some bodies piling up.
Some of these are gonna smash into the ambulance
and the ambulance will be crushed
and even that won't work anymore.
So this amendment is doing this
by repealing those health sector principles.
And these principles include the responsibility
of the health system to build those cliff pathways.
The responsibility to equity.
Equity is a core function of any health system.
And so if we're removing that,
we're effectively gutting the health system.
The health sector principles also contain really key
references to T which provide the right to health
for all New Zealanders
and the right of MA of Maori to health equity.
Um, and is also cut down and cause.
So by removing te removing equity
and the responsibility of the health system
to focus on health not just as disease,
you're actually relegating the health system.
So not even its bare minimum function,
it's gonna be a gutless husk.
Um, and I think as well, I heard this earlier, elling,
the health charter is also part of those guts
and removing this,
the government's really telling us
they don't care about health workers.
So we think the bill shouldn't proceed as it is.
The principle should remain.
I'll pass the for the second issue.
Thank you. Summer. Um,
uh, I am a GP
and have worked in New Zealand
for 23 years in the health system, both in the hospital
and for the last se 17 years as a GP in the community.
Um, OYO has huge problems
with the rollback
of equity provisions within the proposed amendments.
Um, as summer has mentioned, much of this stems from
a proclaimed willingness to enact the principles of TE
while simultaneously removing any opportunity to do
that within the health sector principles
and within the other amendments that are proposed.
Um, the au Maori advisory committee will be already done
that Will be essentially, um, hamstrung by having,
uh, removing any owners upon URA to take account of
what they are recommending and what they are saying.
And as has been mentioned earlier, the, um, the hamstringing
of the Iwi Maori partnership boards
and putting an extra layer of bureaucracy between them
and URA is, is, is,
is a massive problem and should not go through.
I I would like though to, to make the point that the,
the proposed amendments make the, would make the act
internally contradictory when you go back
to the purpose of the act.
Even if the amendments go through to promote, protect,
and prove the health of all New Zealanders to achieve equity
and health outcomes, in particular for Maori
and to build towards Paya for all New Zealanders
with the proposed amendment for improved access
to timely care, that will be impossible
with the other amendments
that are put in the act becomes the statement
and the purposes of the act become impossible to meet
with the amendments that come in.
Um, and as an overseas doctor, I want to stress the, uh,
the, the, our previous submitters who, who, when I came
to New Zealand first, um,
the inequities within health are stark,
but we were never given any opportunity
to improve our cultural safety or cultural competence.
That is something that has come in
and has developed over the last 15 years.
And I see this act as repealing that.
Um, and going back on our obligations as clinicians
to achieve that cultural competence as best we can.
It makes it increasingly difficult.
It will affect the ability to recruit internationally
as people become aware
that essentially there is a racist health system in place,
um, and re recruiting international c clinicians will become
more and more difficult.
Kira.
All right, thank you. We've got a question from Johana.
Kiara, thank you so much, um, both of you
and for bringing your voice, uh,
into the select committee process.
Um, I wanted to talk to you because your clinicians
and public health, um, are mindful that just a couple
of weeks ago, uh,
the Public Health Advisory Committee released their report,
uh, determining our futures
and, um, you know, that that is awesome in terms
of giving effect to what Paya was
and the, uh, opportunities available through Paya, uh,
for us into the future.
Um, do you think with the structural changes
that are being proposed,
and I mean, you know, it's significant
because as you've already shared summer, you know,
they're ripping the guts out of the health system by,
by repealing half of it.
Now, if we don't, if we aren't explicit
and we don't outline it in the legislation,
that it's a slippery slope in terms of reducing, uh,
the focus on high needs populations on
what the data's telling us.
And when we've got our own public health advisory committee
coming up with this awesome report
and sharing with us the vision that gives effect to, to pay,
uh, is it mom o is, is it, is it just undermining
what we've done to date and where we could go in the future?
I think so. I think when you remove equity in terms
of the legal responsibility from the health sector,
then yeah, um, you won't be able to
or you won't be beholden to follow up that great work.
T do you have anything to add?
Um, look, I, I'm, I'm a gp as I mentioned,
I, I enjoy my job.
Um, but very few of the people that I see
actually want to be in to see me.
I, I've, you know, I've reconciled myself
that over the years I would much rather people stay healthy
and do not come in to need to come in to see us.
Um, and the, the proposed amendments to the bill, they,
they make healthcare delivery into a sort
of a really reductive 1950 style.
You get sick, we give treatment, um, times moved on.
Since then, health should be about maintaining
health and wellbeing.
It should not be about putting a bandaid on a cut
after the cut happens.
Might be necessary from time to time,
but really, I wanna see empty waiting rooms.
That's what I wanna see.
And just supplementing on
that while I've got the opportunity
before the chair says something.
Um, so in thinking about that,
and we are pulling the ambulance back from the edge
of the cliff 'cause we're not even wanting
to get into secondary
or tertiary care if we were
to pull the ambulance further back
and focus on healthy communities, healthy whanau, healthy,
thriving, um, individuals as well, um, surely that's
where an investment in a public health approach
and that population focus would, um,
give us the biggest gains
and prevent that burden of health
that the system is currently crippled by
There. There's no doubt about
that. Sorry to jump in somewhere.
There's no doubt about that.
Um, I would suggest as well that the amendments
to the bill make it really difficult to achieve that
because health will no longer be, um, something that needs
to be taken into account with decisions made in other areas.
We look at things like transport, air quality, housing, um,
food, et cetera.
Decisions made within other departments,
within other ministries have a huge impact on the work
that we do, and they don't really need to take account
of the health implications of the decisions that they make.
This will make it even more difficult for them to do
that if these amendments are, are, are passed through.
Right. Any more supplementary or otherwise.
Thank you for your submission.
Thank you so much and thank you for your work on, uh,
on primary care as well.
Thank you. And now we've got a link submitter, Dr.
Luke Benford and Jessica Cap Kipa from Royal New Zealand
College of General Petitioners.
Alright, we go. Good afternoon, uh, committee afternoon.
Good afternoon, Luke and Jessica.
Jess is, uh, in our Wellington office.
You guys got 10 minutes in the fourth is yours.
Okay, so I'll, I'll kick off and then Jess will come in
and introduce herself properly.
So I'm Luke Bradford, I'm the GP in
and the president of Royal New Zealand College of gps.
I've been in front of a number of you before.
So hello again. Thank you for the opportunity to speak
to our submission on the Healthy Futures Amendment.
Bill, uh, the Royal New Zealand College
of General Practitioners as a membership of 6,000 gps
and is responsible for the training
and ongoing quality assurance
of general practice in New Zealand.
We ensure quality of both GPS and the practices.
We'll take our submission as read,
but we'd like to highlight two key elements.
Firstly, our concerns
that the amendments tabled seriously undermine the health
systems focus on the poor health outcomes,
which are specifically attributable to ethnicity.
And secondly, that the new clauses seek
to prevent clinicians from speaking openly about concerns
they have around the care provided to our communities.
The college recognizes its role in upholding ity,
oh Yang Maori health rights
and prioritizing the pursuit of Maori health equity.
Whilst it may be an uncomfortable truth
that race is an independent indicator for health outcomes,
it is undoubtedly.
So. Maori across Quintiles have a seven year lower life
expectancy than non Maori.
In New Zealand, Maori have three times
population rates of diabetes.
They have higher rates of ischemic heart disease,
chronic kidney disease,
and cerebral vascular disease might have higher mortality
and later presentations for most cancers,
but especially those detectable earlier such as cervical,
lung and stomach might have higher rates of suicide
and substance abuse disorders.
And they have poorer, um, oral health,
lower immunization rates,
and face increased barriers to seeking care.
All of these factors speak
to a health service which is failing to properly care
for our Maori wau.
Our members see the inequity daily
and recognize the difficulties Maori face
and engaging with a system which is doing to them as opposed
to doing with them the pie order outlook
to recognize the vital partnership from Maori in designing
and delivering to the their communities.
It recognized the findings of Y two five seven five,
and its call for stronger accountability to ity
and to approaches that are Maori led.
The proposed changes dilute disempower,
or deliberately remove this focus.
The way we have been doing it
so far does not work for Maori.
We override peace of legislation,
which governs our health system, needs to be brave enough
to recognize our failings thus far
and empower a different strategy.
One which Maori communities have told us they see is
vital co-design.
Iwi led service delivery
and accountability must exist in order to lower the burden
of disease, which are attributable to ethnicity
and regain the trust of our Maori and Pacific wau.
This must occur at a local level as well as national,
recognizing that autonomy and participation must be
available to all Kiwi Maori partnership boards are an
appropriate vessel for stewardship.
We must retain health strategies for Maori,
for Pacific persons
and for disabled persons as outcomes for all
of these groups are unacceptable
and removing strategies removes the onus
to focus on these poorer outcomes.
Secondly, we have concerns with the new clause.
11 moves to silence medical expertise
and is a political power play designed to restrict
clinical expertise, autonomy, and voice.
Clinicians, experts in their field
and trusted by society must be free
to speak out when necessary, regardless of
how it looks for the government of the day.
The addition of Clause 11 is clumsy at best and cynical
and author authoritarian or worse.
Over to you, Jess.
I'm here today as a Maori gp, a member of t Maui
and part of the URA Maori
and equity team at the Royal New Zealand College
of General Practitioners.
For the past seven years,
I've worked in an iwi owned high needs practice in Hastings.
Every day our team sees the impact of inequities
in our health system on the lives of whanau.
Following Luke's outline of our statistics, I want
to ground this court all and what it means on the front line
and why these amendments matter.
The original intent of piora was clear to achieve equity
and health outcomes, in particular for Maori
and to embed accountability to TEI into the health system.
The difference between giving effect to te
and merely considering Maori interests is not just
legal technicality.
So the difference between accountability and discretion.
When obligations to ity are strong, we can push for change
and hold the system to account When they're weak,
we slip back into business as usual
and our inequities deepen.
The Y Tangi tribunal
and Y 2 5 7 5 called for stronger obligations,
not weaker ones.
Diluting these commitments takes us backwards
and undermines the intent of piora in our clinic.
Systemic barriers to accessing health are evident every day.
One of our patients came with a history of breast cancer
and she presented with palpable lymph nodes.
We arranged an ultrasound,
but then she disappeared, uh, phone calls, little texts,
letters, nothing reached her.
So one of our health coaches in Mia went to check in.
They found her, brought her back
and had been working alongside her ever since, getting her
to scans, hospital appointments, arranging home help,
and supporting her and her whanau through the journey.
Another story, just three weeks ago,
a single dad rang our clinic in tears, overwhelmed without,
without any kai for himself and his son.
Our receptionist reassured him, connected
with our whanau Meki team,
and by that evening, he had a Kai parcel delivered.
He rang back thanking us.
These stories show what equity focused community-based care
looks like, but they also demonstrate
how incredibly fragile it is, dependent on local knowledge,
targeted strategies, and a workforce
who can walk alongside our whanau.
Without the statutory backing of te
and targeted strategies, this kind of care becomes hard to,
to sustain repealing the ha Maori strategy.
Pacific Health Strategy
and Disability Strategy removes the very tools
that ensure visibility and accountability.
A generic equity framework is not enough.
We know one size fits all approaches fail.
A Pacific grandmother with diabetes,
a ranta in a rural town, a ATU is struggling with transport.
They all need different solutions designed
with them, not for them.
And without targeted strategies,
their distinct needs disappear into the average.
These amendments ask us to step backwards from partnership
to consultation, from obligations to goodwill,
and from targeted strategies to generic approaches.
Our communities deserve better.
They deserve a system that gives effectivity, sustains,
iwi partnership and commits to equity,
not just in words but in law.
Thank you. Thank you
so much for your submission today.
And, um, you know, off the back of you've crystallized,
you know, uh, that voice, um, that's coming through
of concern in terms of the structural change that's to come.
But what I wanted to ask was in terms of, you know,
the royal college, your journey in terms of, um,
working together in a mahi space,
and I can call it co-governance, you know, you've,
you've got your Taha Maori and your Taha
and you are working together as a team for better outcomes
for the college, but also in terms of
how you deliver these types of approaches, uh, in a te way.
Can you share with us that journey?
Because I, I think that it helps us, um, learn
that this is happening in our communities where we try
and mahi for better outcomes for, for all.
Yeah. Shall I, Jess? Yeah, Go on.
So, I mean, we, we started out with, um, specific chapters
and uh, uh,
and we had, uh, t Maori came about out of our Maori chapter
and a and a recognition that just seeking input
and feedback alone were not enough to change the numbers
of GPS we had or the support to held Maori,
or actually more importantly, get education across all
of our registrars and fellows
and an understanding of the needs from Maori communities.
And so, um, from that moved, uh, recognition
that we needed input into a governance level
and within the executive level of the college.
And so we have, um, partner
put two partners onto the board as as reps.
And we have a head of equity who sits at the ELT and a
and a strategy that is across, um, the college
for our roles, which in which is focused, um,
on increasing our numbers of Maori Pacific doctors,
but also improving the outcomes for, um,
our patients on Maori
and patients, uh, across other groups including rural and,
and, and Pacific as well.
Jess, you?
Well, I guess so I, so I've recently joined, uh,
the college as, uh, they call me the HA Maori and
or ha Maori clinical fellow.
And I work, uh, with the Tim Maori
and the rest of the equity team.
The, the vision I guess is
of the equity team within the college
to be an enabling function.
So the, the role of, of equity
and all that, MAHI doesn't purely sit with the equity team.
So the equity team supports the other business units.
Membership learning, um, corporate services supports all
of the other business units in order to, for everyone
to best understand how equity could enable them to, uh,
better do their mahi so that we can all work together
so we're not, um, culturally loading our equity only staff.
They're not the only ones who are responsible
for the outcomes of our otake Maori Maori strategy.
And that, um, we are all actually on the same waka
and trying to do our best to, uh, yeah, try
and achieve the same things and work together across the
whole of the college and throughout including, um, up
to the board and right down through our chapters
and our faculties and our members on the ground.
Okay. That's a big mahi. Thank you so much.
That's, that's cool because you are, you're giving effect
to the te relationship and it, and it takes bumps
and you know, the journey is ups and downs,
but you're embedding it and I thank you
for role modeling that today.
You right. Thank you. Thank you for your submission.
Now we've got the link submitter Jan Center,
Uh, sorry Mr. Chair that's
has dropped out so
We can move through to the next.
No problem. So now we got Royal Australian College
physician Dr.
Matt Miller.
Yes.
Good afternoon Matt.
Thank you for giving us the opportunity to speak today.
I'm a physician, uh, and hematologist at Targa Hospital,
and I'm the chair of the Maori Health Committee
for the rural Australian College of Physicians.
And I'm here to present on behalf
of the entire rural Australasian College.
We represent over 30,000 medical specialists
and trainees across New Zealand and Australia.
Um, I bring forward the views of our college
who are deeply committed to equity, evidence-based care,
and upholding to city c Yen as a foundation for a fair
and effective health system.
The RACP has a strong commitment to public health equity
and to, it supported the Piata Act in 2022,
which transformed a New Zealand's health system by priorit,
prioritizing equity, the social determinants of health
and culturally safe care.
The act also strengthened New Zealand's standing in the UN
declaration of the rights of indigenous peoples under
and address systemic breaches of
identified in the Y 2 5 7 5 report
marking a major advancement in Maori health governance.
We are concerned that the healthy futures pilot amendment
bill reverses the evidence-based equity focused direction
that this, um, health system is heading in.
The bill removes key references to
and undrip, all
of which are absent from the proposed amendment.
This undermines the crown's obligations
to Maori under both domestic and international frameworks.
We're also concerned about the limited consultation
undertaken in the development of this bill.
The Ministry of Health own documentation indicates
that consultation was primarily internal
with no clear evidence of engagements with Maori health,
equities, entities, professional bodies, or consumer groups.
This is just not good enough.
In today's day and age, a safe health system
for Maori will create a safe health system for all
representing consultation, um, uh, with Maori
represents consultation for for most underprivileged groups.
Um, but, but we've specifically target Maori
because of the unique relationship with the crown.
This bill does not meet the current's responsibilities
to engage with Maori on matters
affecting their rights and wellbeing.
When and aka were introduced,
there was real hope within the system
of something great about to happen.
And the subsequent series of legislative changes that have,
have, have undone this.
And we are going to speak about the six specific
concerns our members have.
The general feeling, uh, at the moment is one
of just survival, not one of thriving.
Number one, the removal of the health sector principles.
And Tim or the New Zealand Health Charter
RACP strongly opposes the proposed removal
of key principles from Tata Act
in the New Zealand Health Charter.
These principles are not just symbolic, they're essential.
They're essential to achieving fair
and effective health outcomes.
They ensure our health system supports the full spectrum
of wellbeing, including both mental
and physical health across all communities.
We are especially concerned about the removal of
the New Zealand Health Charter.
This charter provides a shared vision of
how healthcare workers should be valued and supported it.
The removal sends a worrying message at a time when w
workforce wellbeing, retention
and growth are more important than ever.
This is demonstrated no better than today by this being one
of two days worth of strikes this week by the nurses union
and the senior doctors, uh,
are currently in consideration for industrial action.
It's also important to remove that 80%
of health outcomes are shaped by social determinants
outside of the health system.
While these are shared responsibilities across the sectors,
the health system plays a vital role in addressing them.
Let us be clear. Removing key principles from will harm
health outcomes, especially for Maori.
It abandons proven evidence-based care in favor
of a one size fits all model that has already failed.
So our question is, is why are we returning towards it?
The bill also weakens the foot order accountability
for workforce wellbeing,
risking further damage to trust in morale.
When workforce retention is critical,
we recommend maintaining to Maori and the pay act.
Number two, the duties of the Board of Health New Zealand.
The proposed changes to clause 16
of the Paya Act would remove key collective duties from the
border of TE water.
Specifically the amendment eliminates the requirement
for TE water to maintain systems
and process that ensure it has the capacity to understand
Maori services, cultural safety, Maori
and Maori perspectives on health services.
We believe this is a serious step backwards
cultural safety is not a distraction.
Excellence in cultural safety is clinical excellence.
I dunno how many times we have to say this as clinicians,
but this is something that ensures
that patients receive care
that is respectful, relevant, and effective.
It is the cornerstone of good quality care.
The government has a duty under Titi
and is part of good governance to protect the health
of Maori and the wider population as a whole.
Removing this obligation from
to far orders board under mindset, duty
and risks, further entrenching inequities in our house
system from a, from the top down,
we recommend retaining these duties of the board.
Number three, diminishing the role
of Iby Maori partnership boards.
The RSCP opposes proposed changes to the prior act
that would weaken I Maori partnership boards, reducing them
to advisory roles under my risk worsening health inequities
and silences the Maori leadership in this country.
We support the collective stance taken at the recent
National HU of ibs, which firmly rejected these constraints.
Im PBS are not merely consultation panels.
They're iwi led system partners with the authority
and accountability to shape, invest
and commission Kapa Maori services
and hold the health system, um, more widely to account
their role is essentially not only for Maori health,
but the wellbeing of all New Zealanders.
When the system fails Maori, it fails. Everyone.
Marginalizing local expertise leads to inefficiency,
poor outcomes and wasted resources.
We recommend restore
and strengthen IMPB roles under Supply Order Act reinstate
section 90 to support Maori representation.
Ensure proper resourcing for IMPB leadership.
And require general code design by TE Water.
Number four, changes to the appointment
of Expiratory Advisory Committee on Public Health members.
We are concerned that the Expert Advisory Committee on
public health could be made up
of people without the appropriate public health expertise.
Removing parameters that ensure appropriate knowledge
and expertise on the on the committee will undermine public
safety under the amendment.
The requirement for members
to have public health expertise is being weakened.
The proposed criteria that the minister needs
to only be satisfied
that the person is suitably qualified is
vague and insufficient.
When it comes to safeguarding public health.
The committee plays a crucial role in guiding our national
response to complex health changes.
As medical specialists, we saw first hand
during CO the COVID-19 pandemic how vital it is
to have strong, independent evidence-based
public health advice.
Expertise matters and lives depend on it.
Removing clear parameters around qualifications, risk,
undermining the integrity
and effectiveness of the, of the committee
decisions made without the right expertise can have serious
consequences for communities of public health is a,
is an appropriate postgraduate qualification.
Um, that that takes significant amounts
of study once you've already become a doctor
and it shows why this is an important part in our health
system, we recommend maintaining the requirement for,
for appropriate public health training to be part
of the expert advisory panel.
Number five, focus on providing
and planning for infrastructure without workforce planning.
The RSP welcomes a focus on providing
and planning for infrastructure.
While we support this inclusion, this lacks, uh,
corresponding emphasis on workforce planning,
which is equally critical for healthcare delivery.
Infrastructure alone cannot provide
and deliver care that people do without a well-supported,
well-planned health workforce.
Brick and mortar will not
translate into better health outcomes.
Years of underinvestment in workforce planning
and less with some serious gaps in ability to grow, recruit
and retrain the health professionals we need.
We are not keeping pace
with the increased complexity of health needs.
All the growing diversity of our population,
we recommend a strategic workforce planning that is,
um, um, urgently.
This includes collecting
and using comprehensive workforce data
to improve inform modeling
and decision making, especially robust data on Maori
and health professionals where representation is essential
to delivering culturally safe care.
Number six, legislating health targets.
While we understand the intent to improve accountability
and performance, legislating rigid targets can have
unintended consequences,
potentially undermining the health of the population.
The emphasis on delivering the right services,
the right people at the right time oversimplifies the
realities of our health system.
Healthcare is complex and rigid targets risk.
Narrowing the focus to
what is measurable rather than what is meaningful.
Rigid approaches reduce adaptability
to emerging health issues
and shifting community needs
that may undermine long term goals like equity
and improved health outcomes.
The example is that the target
to have all first special appointments seen within four
months undermines patients already in the system
and is affecting timely follow up and ongoing.
Um, compromised patient care is one
of the unintended consequences.
This sort of work often leads to gaming of the system
to make targets artificially look good
and often have no evidence to support them.
We recommend removing, um, legislating
embedded targets within the act.
In closing, RACP urges the government
to preserve equity accountability and to 3D commitments
and to paya warning
that proposed changes could weaken the health system.
Uh, overall we would recommend not making any changes
to the Paya Act 'cause we don't
believe that it is actually broken.
However, we have
provided six recommendations within which that we think
that if it was to go forward,
that we would like to see included.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak today,
and I welcome any questions that you have. Nu
Thank you. You please
your submission exactly 10 minutes.
So yeah, thank you for your submission. Thank you.
Unless if I'll submit from, uh, ro
Ra. Can you hear me?
Ra? Yes, we can hear you.
We can hear you. So you got 10 minutes
and the force is yours.
Yeah.
Um, my name is Simon.
Um, I'm a research fellow on the, um, research program,
which is an anti-racist research program, which is funded
by, um, MB nationally.
Um, I'm just going to proceed
and assume that my written submission is read.
Um, our position is clear on this particular, um,
bill, we opposed it.
Um, first a briefing
evidence based when the original pay order bill was
introduced in 2021.
Um, our team analyzed public submissions.
We identified patterned re rhetorical framing, used
to oppose the legislation, ways of talking
and shaping of how people interpreted Maori health
and Maori uh, rights.
Three themes were dominated in those forms of, um,
research one, um, positioning PAIA as the norm, whether
or not, uh, whether through pa uh, non cultural assumptions
or denying PAIA as a culture altogether.
Two, invoking equality
and to argue for, um,
identical treatment while ignoring differential needs
and historical injustices
and obviously the inequities that are present.
Three, um, searching one people
that were all just New Zealanders to erase
and our obligations to Titi.
We later then, um, analyzed submissions, um,
on the payor bill, uh, mainly from health professionals, iwi
and Hapu, uh, and also community organizations.
Those that are endorsed, um,
and recommended, uh, and recommended strengthening it.
Those voices were obviously sidelined from
a treaty perspective.
The issue with the current bill at start, if utility
were being honored, iwi Maori partnership boards
and ho Maori advisory committee, uh, committees would be,
um, standing and would have standing in authority at least
equal to Health New Zealand, not regulated
to be only quantitative, uh, consultative under this bill,
um, iwi Maori partnership boards, um, can be bypassed
by Health New Zealand when setting Kopa Maori, um,
investment priorities.
This is not partnership.
This is an advisory at the pleasure
of the Crown advisory status.
Without decision making power will not shift these outcomes
and obviously inequities will persist.
This raises two practical risks.
One, um, capability without Maori authority
baked into the system,
we cannot be confident Health New Zealand has
or will develop the necessary expertise in COPA Maori
health, cultural safety or Maori governance.
Two, accountability without clear shared decision making,
there is no enforceable pathway to equity.
The bill also runs, um, the direction, uh,
runs against the direction set by the YANG Tribunal
and particularly I note Y 2 5 7 5, um,
which called for a transformed
treaty compliant health system.
To address those, um, historical
and ongoing Maori health inequities,
the tribunal welcome the establishment of, um,
as a positive development towards
equitable care and partnership.
Its subsequent urgent inquiry into disestablished.
Um, the, um, found
that the crown's process was driven
by political ideology rather than being evidence based.
And while short of being treaty compliant
or treaty consistent, this,
these warnings land quey on the proposals that are in front
of you today, we are concerned about the bills
Sim I, um, symbol symbol, uh,
symbolically and practically making invisible
at a structure level, the name change
and the diminishing of Maori authority.
Um, risk masking while evidence in equities
through the house system.
Payor is about healthy futures order for the people
diluting Maori decision making, undermines that vision
and also delays the
targeted system level action Maori communities need
and have called for, for generations,
let us be very plain.
Racism is a social determinant of health.
It shapes access, quality
experiences and outcomes.
Policy does not directly name racism, shift power
and resource Maori solutions
will reproduce only the status quo.
On those notes, I want to take some practical stuff
that has happened that I know
of in my own life within my own AU
and provide them to you as a, our what potential
and practical outcomes may, uh, result as a,
as this bill may actually be, um, passed into law
and these changes as well.
Let's take aha from na, um, ha based in Whakatane,
how New Zealand bypasses the Maori, um, pa, um,
iwi Maori partnership board.
And from a Maori led midwifery clinic
to a larger mainstream unit, 60 Ks away for efficiency.
Got to love that public management aha loses continuity
of care, can't always secure transport
and avoids, um, appointments
after engaging in culturally unsafe interaction.
Obviously it's allocated it's procedural racism from, um,
bypass powers and advisory owning Maori roles.
Then there's hammi from 68 years old,
has a diabetes management in lu.
After an internal review, health New Zealand
retires the Papa Maori mobile clinic co-designed with a,
um, iwi Maori, um, partnership board
and replaces it with a generic telehealth from
or from Hamilton with patchy reception up in the hills
and no options.
Obviously, coral, um, sugar levels are going to go
through the roof allocated racism
as Maori specific services are defunded.
Procedural racism as Maori governance is sidelined.
Then for my last example here is 19-year-old
Hemi from ua,
who's currently in a mental health crisis in Tamaki
because the act doesn't require binding equity targets
or Maori, um, co-governance, health New Zealand reports,
citywide averages wait times
that ultimately hide Maori delays.
I Maori, um, partnership board advice
for Kopa Maori, um, crisis respite is ignored.
We, we wait six weeks, police attend and he's sectioned.
It's not just that, is that as you grow up Maori
and you've engaged, um, with Wana who having, um, engaged
with the mental health system, you'll come across the thing
that you'll experience suicide.
What you may do here may end up
with Maori kids in the ground.
So EPIs, uh, epistatic, um, accountability racism
through measurement that obscures harm
and removes consequences accordingly.
Our recommendations are as follows,
and do not proceed with this bill.
Withdraw it, um,
and initiate genuine
good health engagement for Iwi Maori partnership boards, the
Maori advisory committee, Maori health providers
and Maori communities on a way forward
that strengthens Maori health and also deals with equity
and Maori authority.
As the committee nevertheless advances the bill,
it must be substantially amended, um,
to restore shared decision making, um, to prioritize, um,
good investment and accountability for Maori Health.
Impose a binding duty on Health New Zealand to engage with,
um, the Maori community on all Copa Maori, um, investment
and service design decisions, not discretionary consultation
ring fencing and growing sustained funding
for COPA Maori services and work, uh, force development
and protections against reallocation.
We must name racism as a determinant of health in the act
and remove measurable equitable targets.
Um, public reporting
and consequences for non-performance
uphold Maori's data sovereignty require
ongoing capability building and cultural safety
and COPA Maori health across housing New Zealand governance
and operations,
and ultimately commit to an independent review lead jointly
with Maori against equitable, um, against inequity
outcomes within a defined timeframe.
These are not just symbolic tweaks.
They are minimum conditions for system that meaningfully
advances by order
and act will actually deal with Maori inequity
and the health crisis that we
as Maori face on a daily basis.
Sorry, Simon, it's more than 10 minutes now.
Can you just summarize it in last sentence?
Our research shows that Maori, um,
decision making is real outcomes improve.
Um, what is only advisory when it's only advisory
and equities persist pay order will, um, not be achieved
by softening the very levers that work.
Thank you for your submission. Thank you so much.
Now, because this over the time we can't ask the question.
Sorry about that. So now we've got a,
we got L better Rose Black.
Hi Rose.
Oh, Koto Kia
Call rosea.
I'm, I'm also a member of
Stir, who you've heard from already.
Um, a fellow of the New Zealand Psychological Society
and a registered community psychologist, um,
and part of the ro a small part of the RO research.
Um, I
Can, oh, sorry. Rose, do
you wanna turn on your video
or you you're more comfortable with the
Not on?
Yes. Oh, sorry.
Thank you. Apologies. I didn't realize.
Um, firstly, I want to
outrightly reject this amendment bill.
I consider it a further breach of, of WA
And I also think it reflects some of the discourses
that we have inherited from the 15th
Century Doctrine of Discovery.
It is a further, um,
an ongoing reinforcement of racism
from a dominant majority,
and it also ignores any of the recommendations of the
URA Y 2 5 7 5 report,
which the Paya Act,
in essence seek to address.
And, and I want to talk about how much as a PA
or how little as Pakeha we understand about Maori health
systems and the way that
Maori do operate in ways that provide incredible health
and wellbeing to their communities, to their whanau,
and also to all of us in ways that remain hidden
because of the dominance of the care system,
that we tend to ignore those health giving ways.
And I worked in public health, um, through the COVID system
and or through the CO when we were dealing with COVID.
And one of the best things that happened through the COVID
response was that Maori were able to step into a breach
that were unable to fill and,
and to ensure that all of us were, um,
s actually all of our lives were saved in ways
that they wouldn't have been
otherwise, had no not been there.
That the, the response was strengthened that
Manke was shared and, and the health
provided was more than just vaccinations.
People were able to be
provided with prescriptions, services went to communities
where possible to support them, and,
and that we considered broader, um, aspects
of providing health, such as ensuring
that whanau at home had enough food in their households,
that they had shelter that was appropriate
to their needs where possible.
And this response was enabled largely from MA
and Pacific communities.
So I really want to acknowledge that work.
And also, I just want to reflect also the,
what Hemo just talked about in terms of
this bill reflecting anti Maori views.
And those views are really strongly held
and we're seen right through the, um,
many submissions to the original,
um, pay bill.
And I think this government in the way
that it's operating is, is reflecting
and not just reflecting enacting anti Maori views.
They're, they're ignoring who we are
as the dominant pake population
and pretending that we don't have a culture.
And that I think is really damaging.
And I just want to go on to say that, um,
I recommend that the, um, title
of the bill will re be retained as paya.
It is a breach of ti to not place Maori
or Maori first,
and that if we call it healthy futures,
just like Health New Zealand, very few people now talk about
taura in the strength and the fullness of what URA brings.
I just hear referenced Health New Zealand,
and we are losing a great deal in that referencing.
So I would hope that we can retain payor
because that is a much fuller concept
of health, health giving.
Then I think, um, healthy futures is,
Uh, thank you so much.
I think, uh, it's a little bit over five minutes now,
but thank you so much for your submission, rose.
Thank you. Kiara.
Kiara. And now we have, um, the Royal Australia
and New Zealand College of Psychologists.
Uh, sorry, uh, psychiatrist. Sorry.
Do we have Royal?
Yes, we got you. We
There? Yeah.
Yep. We are there. Now
Yoda Here.
Thank you for the opportunity that we've got to, um, to,
to share our thoughts and our, um,
and our, our position on, on the, on the bill.
Um, I'll start off. My name's Ron Baker.
This and, and, and Moy Mil is, is as the other person, uh,
representing, um, the College of psychiatrist,
the Royal College of Psych, which is both an Australia
and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists.
Um, and we, uh, we are representing the, the, um,
this proposal on behalf of the college Koto.
I've got three, two things to start off with.
The of the has been around a long time, nearly 200 years,
and we have progressively, um, advanced our way of,
of living together over a long period of time, um,
in various stages, uh, of understanding.
And finally, we've come to this, this time
and in lots of ways, this is going back, uh,
back a hundred years for us.
Um, and not, not 20 25, 19 25,
when the thinking was exactly the same that, um, uh,
much more dominant, dominant, um, cultural way or pa
or European way of looking at, at, um,
how the treaty might be interpreted
or how we might also find some ways of wellness
or goodness being together, living in our country together.
This is, um, this is going changing a lot of the structures
and a lot of the, um, considerations we've come
to develop together.
Uh, it's, it's, and it,
and it is taken us away from
the orientation we have about wellness to continue
to look at a disease orientated
and a deficit orientated, um, way of thinking.
Uh, and there is, there is no future in that.
All as we have is a range,
and it has produced a range of numbers of deficits,
which tell us not only us,
but how everybody suffers from a, from a disease orientated,
um, situation.
Suicide is one of the most classic ones.
There's 607 people died from suicide last year,
and it's something which is increased over these years,
but it is in different parts of our, of our communities.
As we become more
and more conducive to talking about one another
and sharing different ways that we might deal
with this issue, it has reduced in significant places,
but it has continued to, um, to grow
and to increase in the communities
where we haven't been able to do that.
Um, and that's been controlled by the amount of resources
and the amount of, of opportunity
and the legislative ways that control
how we might, um, develop it.
And this is making this much more difficult for us to do.
Um, the other one is, again, again, I want to get, uh,
about use of language.
Il our language. Terrell talks about wellness.
There's nothing in it would tell us we were, um,
tells us about disease or negative things.
So the more use we have, we have with
that orientates us towards a different way of thinking,
and a therefore a different way of,
of addressing the issues which we come into, um, um, uh,
coming together with.
And as we get more
and more away from that, unfortunately, um,
this joint thing together is gonna grow, make us more apart
than we are together.
The language itself is, um, and it's a recognized language
and it's more identified in the, in the,
that this is an asset
or a Tonga, which belongs to us, belongs to the country,
belongs to all of us.
Um, this is defining putting a line in,
in a lineation in the, in the, in the land, in the, um,
a mark which takes one part
of the community away from the other.
Other. So that's my beginning.
Um, so the, the, um, the first thing is the college,
the Australian College
of Psychiatrists has actually supported the retention
of Paola, but we, you will have received our submission
that we've also considered
or had a look at should, um,
we not be successful in the first part of the ance of, um,
the principles that the Paya has actually allowed us
to pursue or to work with.
Then there are, you know, the, the second part
of the submission actually, um, forms some suggestion about
what we might do, uh, post that.
So I just wanna go through, um, could do,
because there's a number of things that are put at risk,
at high risk with the, with the change in this,
if the changes in these legislation actually occur.
One of them is that we lose our ability to negotiate
for things like equity, for the ethics of
how services are delivered to Maori.
And we lose a focus on our, um, the retention
or the reclaiming of all those sorts of words
that are, um,
high frequency words within Maori mental health
and Maori health generally.
Um, and, um,
I, I've just been put off by the thing that came up.
I don't have mine. Um, and so,
and so we're talking about equity and, and ethics,
and there is nothing in the new proposal that suggests
that we might actually keep
or recognize our equitable, um, access to resource
to all the different things.
Um, there's an element of cultural safety
that then is removed with the removal of any, um, obligation
to ter or, and I am talking about TER,
that we actually then cause a whole population of people
to be culturally unsafe.
Um, and,
and within that unsafe cultural space, um,
we then can't influence Maori outcomes at the moment,
albeit very slowly.
We have, um, been able through our relationships within
tui been able to start seeing some, uh,
positive Maori outcome, not as much as we would like.
And that's, the college has been in these past two years at
least, um, have, have become very much, uh, committed to
ensuring that we are, um, compliant with,
but actually that we are using to start talking about, um,
positive Maori outcomes.
The other thing that we lose
by actually making these changes is the opportunity first
of Maori to participate in the design of, um, services
that would, uh, actually come out
with positive Maori outcomes,
but also we lose the ability for Maori leadership
to emerge within, um, this, uh, environment.
And what we do know for sure now,
and we have known for some time, is that Maori mental health
and diction is in dire straits.
Um, and this legislation that changes in this legislation
pa order, the the words pa order means looking to the future
are, uh, you know, to the distance for wellness to be,
um, objective.
Um, I both, uh, Ron
and I were members
of various committees on the Royal Commission,
and we don't talk about that a lot, but our mental health
and the way our people were treated in mental health
services being described as torture being described as, um,
lots of, lots of, um, illegal things,
but actually they still exist today, that in some
of the treatments of our people who actually transverse
or traverse mental health services, um, we need
to actually be really, really, um, uh, con uh,
cognizant of the impacts of not taking care of,
um, iwi Maori.
And as a consequence, um, our Pacific Island fan
taking away the, this legislative takes away the right
of the crown to have consultation, consultation
to seek Maori view to seek, I view, to seek whanau view,
to seek ville.
Um, and, and the last point that I want
to make is it changed, doesn't even define us as a group.
We are now defined as high risk or high needs populations,
and those populations are Maori and Pacifica.
Um, and not given the mana of being called, called
who we are as people.
Uh, thank you very much for your submission
and really giving voice to the key concerns
of the Royal College and mindful of, you know,
and wider wellbeing, um, that could be impacted
through the legislative changes to come.
Um, thinking about in terms of,
and the health charter in particular because, uh, that
provided a space whereby the voices of Khi, of the sector,
um, of community iwi.
It was a really, uh,
productive conversation bringing together the voice
of all in order to give direction to organizations,
to entities in terms of what are expectations for care, for
safety, wellbeing, all of those types of things, which
of course, uh, supports patient wellbeing.
So for, for you and thinking about your members, uh,
but also around the safe delivery
and work conditions, um, that we need to provide for staff.
Do you think that by deleting, um, key, uh, structural, uh,
pieces of the legislation
and strategies such as Timor, uh, such as, uh,
health sector principles
and all of the potential risks of our, our, uh,
strategies now being minimized
to being like a chapter in one mainstream strategy,
that it's going to impact on the focus that we need
to really reduce inequalities,
but provide better health outcomes for all of us?
Well, we actually need to be, um,
really against any attempt
to silence our health professionals.
Um, you know,
um, yeah.
So the, the, the best care
is if health professionals can be,
and we, we here as part of the College of psychiatrists
and the psychiatrists also need
to have their voices heard as well.
Um, and they can do that within, within our,
our, our equity ethical
and, um, just the frameworks
or, so that's, that's, um,
a really important part of our submission so that,
that their voices are not, um, silenced either.
And we have some very, you know, um, committed, uh,
partners within the College of Psychiatry.
So to su supplement on that, um, Mr.
Chair, um, knowing
that within the legislation it is proposing that, um,
within the system must be politically neutral, um,
do you think that there is a risk for your clinicians
and your members in terms of being advocates
to utilize the voice
that they have in the mana within the health sector if they
are required to now neutralize themselves on issues, uh,
related to health and wellbeing?
Can I just to use the, uh, example of state care abuse,
of which both Ron
and I have been a part of that, that what happened to people
in, um, you know, state care,
whether it was in psychiatric hospitals
or other places, is that prime example of the,
of, of the, um, loss of the voice
of the health professionals.
'cause we were actually working in these areas at that time,
and we were, people were shut down if they made
any comments whatsoever.
And in the reports of state care,
and we read the reports as well of the impact that happened
for Maori and for Pacifica people, um, it's, it's,
it's shocking that when you take the health professionals
actually actually do contribute to the safety.
And we actually, well, there's, um, one, um, uh,
one of, one part of the legislation
that actually we are taking away is it's almost like it's,
um, that clause 11 is, is dangerous to us.
It's not actually in our best interest. So
Absolutely, it's a muzzling fire.
It's a muzzling because you must politically neutralize
yourselves as clinicians. That's
Right. And that's
what happened with the, with states state care,
um, and care and religious as well.
And I don't know if any of you read some of those reports,
but they were horrifying for us.
And we ran the mental health, um, panel as well
for the state, uh, the, the commission.
And that wasn't very pretty stories either.
So we cannot afford in this country, we are not big enough
to ignore the voices of the profession and the professionals
and professionals who are now, um, taking us long
after to get here, but who actually now, um, see the value
of, uh, treaty relationship that we
Thank you so much for your submission.
We almost 30 minutes now, so yeah.
Thank you so much for your submission. I got one
More thing to say before you, before we finish.
Part of it is like this. We, we, what we were saying is, um,
this removing things from this takes us
back to that situation.
We've worked through some things.
We are now going back
to the situation which allowed the system
to do these things to us.
Sure if We could be,
but we need to say that it needs to stop,
Right? Anyway,
thank you for your submission.
Our next, as Carol on behalf of
Hi Carol.
I'm speaking on behalf of our that we serve.
I want to thank the committee for this opportunity.
I also want to acknowledge those who have gone before me.
Uh, I begin with,
people may pass, but the land
We can start now. That's
Point we're not here just talking about
services or structures.
We are talking about MANA
and about building systems that last, systems that uphold UA
and actually serve our people.
Who are we aka
to delivers Kopa Maori mental health addiction services
across ua, hub Valley and the ra.
We provide crisis, respite, forensic,
step down IOD programs, suicide prevention to
mentoring and mentor programs.
Everything we do is grounded in hope values,
collectiveness for noa.
That's how our people heal.
Our services are inclusive with the, with the,
the acceptance of non Maori local realities
is a city of around 62,000.
Maori are around 23% Pacific people's 27%.
We are a young, diverse, proud community.
But let's be honest, URA carry some
of the highest deprivation in the country.
Cannons Creek and UA are in the top hardship bracket.
Too many whanau are struggling with unemployment, low wages,
poor housing, and the daily grind of poverty.
Health wise, our whanau are hurting high rates
of suicide risk, high mental health distress, overuse
of drugs, diabetes, asthma, heart disease,
including criminal behavior, which contributes to survival.
And yet there is strength amongst us within our community.
We have the leadership of Pacific churches, kaka rugby
and league clubs whanau support each other even when the
system fails us.
That's the reality. Centralized one size fits all models
from Wellington don't fit us.
They never have. What does this government want?
Let's be clear about this bill.
What this bill is doing, it takes ura,
which gave iwi Maori partnership boards some real teeth
after Y 2 5 75, and it pulls those teeth out.
It says I-M-P-P-B-S can engage and advice,
but not decide, not co-design, not Cocom commission.
Look at what happened to Akata Maori Health Authority.
We are an organization that has from conception,
been less funded than non Maori to Akata in a short time,
reviewed our contracts, made them more sustainable
in terms of funding.
Plus look at what does good Maori outcomes look like.
This government wants to shift the power back
to Health New Zealand and the minister
with absolutely no consultation with Maori.
It sets up centralized government policy statement targets
designed in Wellington, not in our communities.
The government is saying this is about efficiency.
We see it differently. It's about control.
It's about stripping back Maori influence
and recentralizing power.
Why we oppose, we oppose this bill
because it undermines Tonga.
It takes TI partnership
and turns it into token consultation
for mental health and addictions.
The consequences are dangerous.
Whanau trust Copa Maori services, they feel safe in
ANA identity and whanau centered care.
If Maori don't lead commissioning,
those services won't get funded properly even.
And when a suicide cluster happens in ua,
we don't have weeks to wait for Wellington.
We need to act the same day.
AU vigils, UA healing circles that works.
This bill risk cutting, that agility,
that build identity
and hope those accessing KO Maori service have proven that
AKA and w lift their confidence
and reduce isolation.
That's the kind of innovation
that comes from Maori leadership,
not from a spreadsheet in Wellington.
And let's not forget workforce.
We need kaito Maori clinicians, healers.
Without them, there's no system.
This bill does not strengthen that.
The proof is here in our own backyard.
F led crisis respite dropped ED presentations
by 40% in a year to access
and choice mentoring lifted Maori addiction recovery
retention from 55% to 82%
boosted cultural identity
and reduced isolation for 70% of PA participants.
Integrating and mii rebuild trust for people
who had had disengaged completely.
Programs utilizing our UA have reduced
suicide related crisis.
W navigation improved housing stability, employment
and reduced justice system involvement.
These are real results.
They show Maori LED commissioning works.
So why would you take that power away?
Our recommendations, we urge you to fix this bill.
Restore and strengthen IMPB powers for real co-design
and cocom commissioning.
Embed en enforceable duties in health New Zealand
and the public health agency.
Ring Feds Copa Maori mental health
and addictions funding,
co-design government policy statement targets would not
with Maori, not over us
or for us resource our we, our workforce
kaito Maori clinicians.
This bill, as it stands,
risks undoing the fragile progress we've made.
It will widen in equities not close them.
We cannot go back to being consulted.
We must move forward as true partners sharing power,
sharing decisions, and resourcing what actually works.
I will close again with the words,
do not turn us back to shore.
I finished,
Um, through the chair.
Oh.
Um, my question through the chair is, um, first to, uh,
make a statement to acknowledge all the mahi, um,
and all the solutions that you spoke about.
Um, two, two questions.
Uh, primary in the sub please through the chair.
Uh, do you think that all the
solutions across, um, from the community grassroots up,
uh, whether it be in our mental health across
to our one order navigators, uh, is
one understood the dynamics
and the intricacy on how the community has this wraparound
and how you have this wraparound solution is
understood by the government.
And the second sub to that is if, uh,
it is understood by the government.
Do you think that, uh, sorry.
And if it isn't understood by the government, do you think
that we haven't got the proposition of the hard work
that's been done in communities in front of them enough?
Um, hey, good part.
I, uh, Debbie, um, you know, straight off,
no, this government does not understand what we do do.
I can honestly say that into aka a short time that they were
in supporting us iwi Maori providers, they understood
and they attempted to bring
what we call positive outcomes.
Outcomes has not been able to tick a box
and write in a sentence that says, oh, Carol did.
Well, today, that's not an outcome.
You know, it, it's about bringing our people out of poverty.
And poverty for Maori is not the same as poverty for,
for non Maori.
So, you know, first of all, we have a government
who absolutely does not understand what poverty
for Maori means.
And for me, they are pushing us further
and further into poverty
With their So-called solutions.
Um, yeah, I I probably not the right partai to
Ask. Oh no, it's just
a final one through the chair. Sorry.
Do your services
and do all the, all the uri,
do they serve all of the community or just Maori?
No, we serve a big part of the community.
I know and for sure that GP services,
you go in there to make an appointment.
There's actually more non Maori in there
accessing their services.
Why? They're cheaper.
They don't charge as much as ma uh, non Maori services do.
Um, you know, waiting lists are everywhere.
They're not just in Maori organizations,
but I believe that, um,
Maori services are accessed even our own.
We have a high number of non Maori access in our services.
And it's because they know what's good
for Maori is good for everybody else.
And what we do in terms of all of those could be
that have a huge meaning to us and are not just words.
Um, they fully embrace those.
So, you know, it's, um, it's great
to have non Maori also accessing our services to prove
to this government that use other ones that build
that bridge between us.
Use are the ones that are saying, you know,
Maori don't need this and Maori don't need that.
And that we're all one peoples.
Well, no, we are not all one peoples. We are who we are.
We are ti we are the people we are.
Thank you so much for your submission.
Now we move on to the submitter, um,
ion ton.
Hi Anne
Ano, um, for Dr.
Marian Layton Ho. I am a, um, specialist physician, um,
working in, um, around New Zealand, various places.
Um, and I would like to speak specifically to the, um,
slightly odd changes that, um, you want to make to this bill
of Section 11 A requiring health New Zealand employees
and contractors to uphold the public service principles,
including the principle of political neutrality.
Now, I know that this has been spoken about
by other submitters today.
Um, and uh, please don't make me talking
specifically about this, mean
that I don't agree with the other submitters.
Focusing on your changes to the Maori
and Maori health parts of this bill
and also the principles
of healthcare delivery and supportive health workers.
Please read my, um, written submission,
um, in regard to that.
But this political neutrality bit is very bizarre.
Why would a government want to make healthcare workers, um,
uphold public service principles of political neutrality?
Now, the only reason that is obvious is
to stop healthcare workers from speaking out
because healthcare workers only speak out when they are
advocating in the best interest of their patients
and of the health service as a whole.
We, um, subscribe to the Hippocratic Oath.
We, um, have first do no harm
and to advocate for healthcare for all New Zealanders
and for healthcare for our individual patients
as our first priority.
Now, I'm not aware that politicians necessarily
make the same oath.
Um, they generally have a little more ideology, um, as part
of their, uh, focus in parliament.
Although I do think that that should be, um,
tempered maybe when in government.
Um, in terms of looking
after the, um, needs of all New Zealanders.
However, to suggest that healthcare workers should only
support the government of the day has been shown
to cost lives seriously, cost lives.
Now, I'm hoping as members of the select committee
and of the other select committee, the other subcommittee
that you are well aware of the, um, implications
of this sort of, um, direct governmental control.
Um, there have been scandals throughout modern healthcare
history, which have,
because of healthcare workers attempting
to be silenced either by governments
or by their managers, um, within, um, systems.
I'm gonna focus on a couple of ones in the NHS
because a larger population in the NHS.
So unfortunately when things go wrong, they go, um,
really badly wrong and can't fly under the radar
and quite so easily as they can in a smaller population.
I'm hoping that you are aware of the Bristol heart scandal
where 35 babies died unnecessarily
because whistleblowers were not spoken, were not listened to
because, uh, managers tried to cover up, um,
inadequate surgical procedures
and inadequate theater procedures.
Um, I'm also hoping that you are aware
of these Stafford Mid staffs hospital scandal, um,
in the early 2000 where the government of the day tried
to bring in significant, uh, budgetary constraints
and, and targets.
Targets that they thought were going to improve care.
But with the budgetary constraints, unfortunately meant
that hospital managers prioritized, uh, budgetary, um,
fiscal neutrality, I suppose, over patient safety.
And, um, hundreds of people died
because, uh,
healthcare staff were prevented from speaking up, um,
in a politically neutral way, IE to support healthcare
and the safety of their patients rather than in support
of the government of the day, which is actually
what this political neutrality is trying to say.
I want you to imagine that you are a patient,
that you've just had a big heart attack
and are being rushed to hospital
or that your mother has had a stroke
and has gone to hospital, or that you've just had a baby
and that baby needs heart surgery
and that you are now in hospital.
Put yourself in Wellington Hospital if you like,
put yourself in any New Zealand hospital.
Now maybe the care there isn't so great,
maybe there's a long waiting list.
Maybe they're shorter doctors, maybe they're shorter nurses.
Why are they short of those things?
Because we've had significant budgetary constraints
because political decisions have meant
that our health service isn't as good as we'd like it to be.
But you know what? I'm not gonna say anything.
I'm not gonna say anything to you or to anybody else
because I've been told not to by the government
and I've been threatened with disciplinary action
by my managers and I've been threatened with loss of job
and income if I go ahead
and speak out now, I don't think
that's what any of you want.
I don't think it's what New Zealanders want.
And bringing in this section 11 A is
that's what this will do.
It will silence your healthcare workers from speaking on
behalf of you and your families when you need
them to speak out.
Don't do this. It's shortsighted, it's authoritarian,
and it's really, really silly thing
to do if you want the best healthcare service
you can have in this country.
I think that's probably my five minutes, so I'll stop there.
Thank you. You've got Johanna.
Thank you Marian. And thank you
for raising this really important issue.
Um, we had the college of, uh, Australia,
New Zealand College of Psychiatry also speaking
to these similar issues
because there's an obligation
to utilize your voice in a professional capacity to speak up
for what you're saying in the system.
Mm-hmm. But also on behalf of patients and communities.
So, um, it would be your strong recommendation
that if there's a biggie that you could, um,
that you could block and a change would be to enable
and support you to utilize your voice.
'cause isn't that a part of what you have
as your Hippocratic oath is to do no harm.
It's important that you have that political freedom
to exercise that, uh, good judgment
and professional view that you have across the system
for your patients and for your community.
Yeah, absolutely. Honey,
you've summed it up beautifully there.
I think not only should 11 a be, um, completely revoked,
like just don't put it in,
but also, you know, go ahead,
strengthen healthcare workers should be
supported to speak out.
And if you are, you know, whichever government is the
government of the day at the time,
the other half are gonna want their
healthcare workers speaking out.
So putting in a rule like this
for your expediency now is actually gonna hamper you when
you are in opposition in, in, in the future.
Because we know New Zealand politics doesn't stay the same.
You know, this is really shortsighted across the board.
Just bizarre that someone thought they should stick this in.
Alright, thank you so much for your pleasure, Marian.
Thank you so much. Now we got the link submitter from
Good Afternoon Kia.
Kia, the floor is yours.
Thank you very much.
Chair and committee members chairperson the trust, uh,
speaking on behalf of Nazi Tam.
Uh, we come before you today, not just as critics,
but as kaki.
We have watched with growing Lan
as this government systematically dismantles the various
structures designed to save Maori lives.
This is not, uh, political rhetoric.
This is about life and death for our people.
We manage 49 hectares of multiple owned Maori land
home to 28 whanau
and guided by our environmental management plan.
What happens in this committee room today will determine
whether our grow up with equitable a access to healthcare
or whether they continue to die younger simply
because they're Maori.
Uh, let me tell you a story of systematic betrayal.
On the 1st of July, 2022.
TKA launched after 40 years of Maori advocacy dating back
to the 1984 Hui.
And the Wang's 2019 whole inquiry found the crown had failed
in duties and health,
and specifically recommended a
standalone Maori health authority.
Yay. But on the 27th of February, 2024,
this coalition government introduced legislation
to abolish the AFA order just 18 months after its creation.
And on the 5th of March, 2024,
the dis establishment passed under urgency
and under 24 hours, no meaningful consultation with Maori.
No back assessment, no alternative plan, no nothing.
And on the 28th of November, 2024,
the Waitangi Tribunal found its process breached multiple
principles including partnership, good faith,
and equal protection.
The crown did not act in good faith
and made ill informed decisions despite knowledge
of grave Maori health inequities.
So today, the 2nd of September, 2025, we're here
because this amendment bill continues
that same destructive pattern
further eroding the health structures our people for decades
to establish chair.
This bill doesn't just tinker around the edges,
it gun punches Maori health equity.
First, it removes the legal requirement
that health system must be equitable,
ensuring Maori receives services in proportion
to health needs and achieve equitable health outcomes.
So that means this government is literally removing legal
obligation to provide equitable healthcare to Maori.
Secondly, it strips CB partnership
iwi Maori partnership boards
of the strategic commissioning powers
reducing them from partners to advisors.
So before this bill, our local boards could evaluate their,
that our hapu had higher diabetes rates
and would work with Health New Zealand
to fund culturally appropriate diabetes prevention programs.
But now, after this bill,
they can only write reports they might be ignored
by willing to bureau bureaucrats.
So third, it continues the crown's
unilateral decisionmaking pattern.
Just as order was abolished without consulting Maori,
this bill was developed without meaningful engagement with
the Ang tribunal, explicitly found this approach breaches to
partnership principles.
So chair, here's
where our environmental management plan, uh, becomes crucial.
Our plan recognizes something.
This bill completely ignores the Modi, Val Lakes rivers
and directly impacts the hill of our people.
So environmental health is human health.
Uh, when the Lake Roti becomes polluted from inadequate
sewage treatment, our w gets sick from swimming
in contaminated water.
When our wetlands are drained for development,
we lose traditional our medicines
that have kept our people healthy for generations.
And when climate change affects our food sources,
it affects our nutrition as well.
So the original Power Water Act
recognize these environmental determinants of health.
This bill ignores them entirely
and it treats health as something
that happens in hospitals rather than something
that flows from healthy fe and healthy communities.
Uh, we are kaki first patients second,
this bill treats us only as the latter
our hapu faces challenges.
This bill doesn't even acknowledge, you know,
a 45 minute trip to the hospital, limited public transport.
If you've got a car, uh, full days trip to
or Hamilton for specialist appointments, you know,
time off work, you've gotta arrange kids time
for arrange something for kids, blah,
blah, blah, blah goes on.
The cost go up. And when you get there, um,
staff don't understand.
Tik, I will even pronounce your name properly.
Say these boards.
We are developing solutions like mobile clinics, telehealth
with cultural interpreters, whanau sensitive care models,
dispel strips and the power,
the commissioning power to do this.
So our people will continue to delay seeking healthcare.
They'll present later with more serious conditions
and they'll create creating high, keep creating higher costs
and worse outcomes for everyone.
So cheer, let me leave you with this, uh, truth.
41 years ago in 1984, our people gathered at Hui
and called for a standalone Hui Maori Health Authority.
We got that, but then you took it away.
41 years of advocacy, research, tribunal inquiries,
health reviews, all pointing to the same conclusion.
Mainstream systems failed Maori.
And 2022, we finally achieved that dream
before order was established.
18 months later, you guys took it away.
Today this bill removes even the legal requirement
for equitable health outcomes.
We're not just going backwards,
we're being erased from the health system entirely.
But here what, here's
what this government doesn't understand.
So our people survive colonization.
They survived the suppression of our language,
they survived the theft of our land.
And we will survive this too
because we know what is good for Maori is good
for all New Zealanders.
And when we have equitable health outcomes,
the entire system improves.
So the from our environmental plan states that it is our,
this talked to us first.
This bill fails at a success of partnership.
So we urge you to substantially amend this bill
to restore Maori health governance,
to strengthen the board functions
and recognize that environmental health
and human health are inseparable lives.
Depend on the decisions you make in this room today.
Alright,
Trust, um, it's, um,
you've comprehensively painted a picture of where we've been
and the opportunity that we had
and what's been stolen from us.
Um, but of course, um, like Matua, um,
Calvin shared earlier from public health perspectives,
we remain optimistic and we will continue to thrive
and push forward as we are intergenerational
and we're not going anywhere.
So thank you so much for being a, for the trust,
but also for Tea Maori in this space. Got
Thank you so much.
Thank you for your submission today.
So our next submit is Theon Luke on behalf of na.
Can you hear me? Yes, we do.
Uh, so my name is Deon Luke.
I'm a principal planner for, uh, my apologies
for our CE today.
He's otherwise engaged.
Uh, but normally we provide submissions on
environmental bills, et cetera.
Uh, this one has been identified by our I
and significantly impacting their rights and interest.
Therefore, we provide the submission
and we'll take our written submission as read.
Uh, we'll try not to take too long.
Um, our written submission was fairly short.
This should be fairly short.
Also, uh, the problem the bill is trying
to address is someone muddled and confused.
The House Health Assurance Unit of the Public Service
Services Commission has identified the prob policy problem.
As there is that an opportunity to improve the clarity
and usability of the Healthy Futures Act 2022
to consider how the act should change
to facilitate meaningful,
meaningful Maori involvement in decisions in the context
of a health system that is shifting
to be more patient orientated.
So this carefully crafted double speak
as apparent when the changes the bill proposes
to make are viewed in light of the disestablishment
of Taka FAA under urgency in March last year,
it was more accurate to state
that the bill is an opportunity for the government
to address a problem that does not exist.
It passed. This bill will complete the gutting
of the PAA Act
and the removal of crown responsibility for health outcomes.
To be clear, we oppose this bill in its entirety.
So the PAA Healthy Futures Act 2022 was developed
to address longstanding issues
of inequitable inequitable access to health services
and inequitable health outcomes have done this
by centralizing health planning, funding
and provision responsibilities in Health New Zealand.
And that repealed in New Zealand Public Health
and Disability Act 2000, which was seen as a resulting
in an overly complicated
and fragmented healthcare system, which led to a lack
of trust in that system.
A key challenge for addressing health inequity is the need
for cross sector collaboration in other areas
which affect people's health, such as education, housing,
the environment and welfare.
Uh, regarding the remove removal
of the health sector principles, the bill poses
to repeal section seven of the act.
The health principles defined in Section seven set out
how the purpose of the act is to be achieved.
A critical, critical part
of the health sector principles is section one E five,
which involves a collaborating with agencies
and organizations to address the
wider determinants of health.
New Section 11 A would replace, would replace
sub parts two and four of part one of the Public Service Act
as the only valid principles to which Health
New Zealand must adhere.
Um, in terms of the repeal of the health charter.
Uh, so the making of the health charter is a responsibility
of Health New Zealand after engaging with health entities,
Maori health professional organizations, health workers
and organizations that are representative of the interests
of the workers who work for those health entities.
Uh, the repeal of sections 56
to 58 will remove the health
charter from the ACT completely.
And amendment of Section 10 will remove the minister's role
to endorse the New Zealand Health Charter.
Section 14
and 15 amendments will remove the function
of Health New Zealand to engage
with Evie Maori partnership boards instead requiring Health
New Zealand to support those Iwi Maori partners Partnership
boards, iwi Maori partnership boards will now be required
to communicate their insights from engagement
with local Maori communities
to the whole Maori advisory Committee requirements
of Section 12 for the minister to be satisfied,
their members appointed to the Board
of Health New Zealand have a wide range of knowledge,
experience, and expertise would be replaced
by ministerial discretion as to
what matters board members should have in terms
of knowledge and experience.
Bill would similarly see the minister not need
to be satisfied that members
of the expert advisory committee on public health possessed
experience and expertise in epidemiology,
health intelligence, health equity,
or population health under changes to section 93.
In summary, the cutting of engagement
and reporting functions from the legislation would remove
Crown Ministerial Health New Zealand
and any health entity responsibility
to act in the best interest of the New Zealand public,
which is currently required by the health sector principles
and the New Zealand Health Charter.
This reduction in ministerial responsibility is a company
by an increase in indiscretion over appointments
to the Board of Health, the Expert Advisory Committee on
public health and what remains
of the Hora Maori Advisory Committee.
The removal of these and other checks
and balances open the health system up
to the privatization agenda of this coalition government
or the existing system is not perfect.
It is based on extensive evidence of the need
for a health system that's integrated, collaborative,
and outcomes focused.
The Payor Healthy Futures Act was an attempt
to deco decolonize the health sector of New Zealand.
What this bill proposes is for the health system
to retreat back to the safety of colonization
and assimilation where un principled capitalism can thrive.
It is telling that three thou 36,000 nurses organization
members are striking today and Thursday.
We acknowledge and support their valid calls
for safe staffing levels,
pay equity in an appropriate pay rise.
We ally support the submission of ura,
the Iwi Maori Partnership Board
and strongly opposing this bill, noting the clear statement
that any change that compromises is unacceptable.
Uh, we also support the submission of the collective
of Iwi Maori partnership boards
that oppose the bill in its entirety
and seek the Health Select Committee's
recommendation that be abandoned.
Uh, just finally wish
to acknowledge knowledge the previous speakers, um,
and the content of the submissions.
Alright, thank you.
I was great to, uh, read and to hear the submission.
Um, some of the, uh, presentations
or submissions today have, uh, told us
and spent a lot of time telling us what they don't want.
And the sad part about this knowing, uh, the hard work, uh,
that you are all doing in the iwi space in, uh,
the Iwi Maori partnership board, the progress.
Um, I wonder if you could please share with us the
opportunities being lost, um,
as the government takes this regressive approach
and where you would like to see the progress
of the hard work that, um,
has been happening within Iwi or Taranaki.
Yeah, I mean, uh, many of the changes, proposal,
obviously short term, uh,
health especially is a long term proposal.
So the, the, the costs over the long term will be far more
than what, what pitiful, uh, costs are safe for now.
Um, iwi here work hard with their partnerships
with two partnerships with their local councils, uh,
and with their health organizations.
Uh, and there's been some really good relationships
established through that.
After requirements are taken away from that through,
through the, uh, the parts of this act, then those will
pretty quickly disappear, I'd say.
Yeah.
Alright. Thank you so much for your submission.
Thank you so much. Now we cut our next submit, uh,
Maya from one of the Maori partnership.
Um, greetings to everybody on the panel today.
Um, my name is Maya Tera
and I am submitting this oral presentation on behalf of,
um, ura,
who are the Iwi Maori Partnership Board, um,
that holds the statutory mandate to represent the voices,
aspirations and priorities of Iwi Maori.
Within the, um, our written submission I will take is read
that was presented, sorry, submitted by our co-chairs,
Jacob Carlson and Dr.
Maurice KeHE Stewart.
Um, and just to hit some high level points,
I wanna make it clear that our IMPB uh,
opposes this bill in its entirety
and recommends that this Health Select Committee
abandoned the bill.
Um, we also support the collective IMPB submission
and adopt its position in full.
Um, this position is one
that we feel very strongly about
because, um, it
focuses on opposing the proposed repeal
and narrowing the truly based provisions
provided in the act.
Um, we also see this as yet another attack on
URA Maori in the context of the fight, I guess that many
of you have already heard about from previous
submit submitters.
Um, that we as a people have had to, um, progress
for decades now in order to ensure that the health
and wellbeing of our people is better managed
and better taken care of
because our lives are on the line here.
So, um, yeah, this particular submission, um,
focuses on the retention
of all current IMPB functions under section 30
and the indivisible link between section 31
and um, section 30.
So section 31 is the provision that provides
for the recognition of all ibs while Section 30
outlines our current functions.
Um, the significant harm as well
that this amendment bill will cause
to Maori health inequity if enacted as proposed.
Um, so to give just a bit of a summary on our submission,
um, we have concerns around
how this bill will, will substantially diminish the role of
IBS by narrowing the purpose
and functions of ibs, um,
by removing the statutory requirement for Health New Zealand
to engage directly with ibs
and by repealing the health sector principles in Section
seven, which guide equitable practice.
Um, it also removes the provisions
that ensure Iwi Maori have a meaningful role in planning
and designing local health services under the current
section six F
of the bill, sorry, of the act.
Um, and we want to make some recommendations in light
of this amendment bill, um, if it were
to be passed regardless of our opposition.
So the first is that we want section three retained in full.
Um, 'cause this will preserve all six
current IMPB functions.
We also want to maintain section six F
and health sector principles in section seven
because this will provide explicit guidance
for equit equity and partnership.
And we also want to preserve the statutory engagement
requirements between Health New Zealand and ibs.
Um, what this bill proposes to do is weaken that
and, um, undermine the current relationship
between Health New Zealand
and ibs,
which has been developed since the Pirate Act was passed.
Um, and yeah, we see any changes to that,
which impacts upon the relationship as regressive
and I guess a waste of a lot of hard work
and ethic effort that has gone into maintaining
that relationship at present.
So that's another recommendation.
Um, we would also like, uh, recognition
of the indivisibility of section 31 and section 30.
So it's difficult for us to see how section 31
and the recognition that our IMPB
and all other IBS currently, um, have
without those section 30 functions being preserved.
So just to hammer home the point
that those section 30 functions are really important in the
context of upholding section 31,
and to be fair, all other treaty aligned principles
that are currently in the act, um,
in terms of the relationship between IBS
and the Holder Maori advisory committee, should any, um,
of these proposed amendments that impact upon
that relationship Go ahead.
We would like to play a more active role in
the appointment process of members
of the Hold Maori advisory committee.
Um, and we would also like to recommend that
there be some reporting back from the Holder Maori advisory
Committee to ibs.
Um, this is integral
because if Im PBS including our own, uh,
are expected to advise the Holder Maori advisory committee,
we see it as only fair and right.
And just that our advice is, um,
either implemented or not
and to be, not, to be informed about the progress of any
of those, um, yeah, advice decisions.
So that is something that we are also
wanting in the event
that this bill in its current form be, uh, progressed with.
So to conclude, I guess
upon the enactment of the pile to act in 2022, um, yeah,
there was a careful negotiation
of a framework balancing crown
and Maori responsibilities under te
and this amendment bill dismantles that balance,
it centralizes control
and it removes effective partnership mechanisms.
For these reasons, IMPB strongly
opposes the proposed amendments, um, particularly those two,
section 6, 7, 14, 15, 16, a 29, and 30,
and urges the committee to uphold the current legislative
role of IBS in their entirety.
Thank you
Co-chairs. And
may the clerk please pay attention to the submission.
Um, you've given a really succinct view, which is coming
through consistently from our Maori, so thank you very much.
And being very explicit in terms of the clauses, uh,
that will undermine the function
of Iwi Maori partnership boards
and really, um, prevent, uh, the full fruition
of the opportunity of working alongside iwi
for health outcomes for the entire community.
Um, I wanted to touch, uh, on the area of the,
um, HA or the ha Maori advisory committee
and the fact that this is a ministerial group compared to
ibs, which have worked for a long time
and building up a mandate
and developing community plans,
having a good look at the landscape
and, um, hearing voices from across WAU and community
and then pumping it back up as intended.
Um, your recommendation around accountability of the HA
as a minimum is a great recommendation as we know that, um,
we have had as Iwi Maori no influence around the appointment
of these individuals.
Um, but you know, the, the accountability
our health select accountability for Maori is big.
So, um, knowing there's some vacancies on the HA now
and there'll be new people going into that space, uh,
I I like to unpack with you how you think there needs
to be a, or some accountability at least
to iwi Maori partnership boards, if not wider
to Maori for this group.
Yeah, it, um, I think that the relationship
between I PBS and H Mac will need to be strengthened
and one way it can be strengthened is for IBS to be a part
of that appointment process to the membership of HA.
Um, in my opinion, I think
that the role IMPB should play should be a quite a large one
given that we are the voice, well, we,
we provide whanau voice from the ground in the
communities to HA.
So even if there was, you know, a majority
of H Max's membership, um, that was determined
by I pbs, there's 15 I PBS across the motu,
that's, you know, a lot of, um, capability to draw from.
And, um, I don't think to date
that the Crown has done a fair job at appointing HA members,
given that, to my knowledge,
there are three vacancies on the board of eight.
So, um, yeah, I, I think that
what you said is right, that accountability mechanism needs
to be strengthened and one way it can be strengthened is
through that appointment process
and through the reporting process as a bare minimum.
All right. Thank you Maya for your submission up on that
One more We run of time.
You know, we very late. Yes. Quick one. Yes.
Don't make a statement. Don't a statement. Sorry,
Maya. In terms of the
H again, um, do you think that there needs
to be more transparency in terms of their work program,
their priorities?
The Public Health advisory group just released a couple
of weeks ago, um,
their massive report on determining our future.
You can see the entirety of where they're going
and what, what data their meetings,
the full packs are available.
We don't have that level of understanding of
what is the work of HA and,
and how the work has been progressed for Iwi Maori.
Do you think that that's a bare minimum as well?
Absolutely. That's a bare minimum,
especially if the whole Maori advisory committee is going
to be the most powerful body that determines decisions
around ura Maori.
I think as you said, a bare minimum, um, of that should be,
um, should should be a thing. Yeah. Alright.
Alright. Thank you so much for your submission.
We, we really run out of time. So, um, thank you so much.
And now we've got l submitted ton
Hatis, you've got five minutes and the fourth is yours.
Great, thank you. Um, can you hear me?
Yes, we do. Okay, great. Uh,
Tana, I'm
Tess, originally from Papa.
Now in Tara. My education
and work background are in public policy, healthcare,
HR management, industrial relations, and itt.
But today I'm speaking in my personal capacity.
So I understand this bill is to put patients first
and to have timely quality care for every New Zealander.
And I think that's something that we all want,
but what I don't understand is how the bill achieves that
Smy and Brown said that the current act includes too much
reporting and bureaucracy,
but isn't that exactly how targets are measured?
Let me be clear. Health workers don't care about targets.
We don't come to work to serve political ideologies.
Health health workers go to work to help patients.
That's it. Health workers are already doing that
and will always do that.
It isn't a lack of targets
that makes the system inefficient.
It's the change consultations, the short staffing,
unsafe staffing, the reduced infrastructure systems
and support that causes inefficiency.
If we want to address long wait times, we need
to address infrastructure supporting that.
And I'm sure there are improvements to be made,
but I just don't think this is it.
So let me take you on a story.
I live in Moana to Bay Plenty.
So let's say I am a young pregnant Maori wni.
I'm young, I'm scared my have other things going on.
So they help where they can,
but ultimately, I'm trying to figure this out on my own.
I already feel ashamed from the stigma people have put on me
being a young Maori woman having kids.
I haven't engaged in house services much
and there's no, uh, midwife in my area, so I don't bother.
When my doctor mentioned about having
one, I see there wasn't one.
And so I don't bother because I'm Maori.
I have a predisposition to diabetes and high blood pressure,
but because I don't have a midwife, I don't know,
I've developed gestational diabetes and hypoglycemia.
I'm now having complications.
There's no after hours where I live
and going to the doctor will cost me $200 that I don't have.
The nearest hospital is over an hour away
and I don't want to go and wait for hours for something
that could be nothing, especially when I'm already
uncomfortable and have to look after my whanau members.
Now things are worse. I wait for my whanau
to come home from work because they can't leave to take me
to the hospital and then organize for someone to care for
their family members, um, that I'm already taken care of.
They come home, I, they drive for over an hour
to Whakatane Hospital because Whakatane Hospital doesn't
have an adequate maternity service
and then transported via ambulance to Tonga Hospital.
We travel at a hundred kilometers
per hour across the country.
Roads to take a detour from the accident on the Maita
Straits hit the traffic at Papa Mo and Bay Fair
before finally arriving at to hospital.
I'm scared. I have no idea what's going on.
I'm rushed to theater for an emergency C Caesar,
the staff are helpful, but I'm overwhelmed
and alone my whanau hours away.
No one knows what's going on.
Some of my whanau travel and arrive
and luckily the nurse from Maori Health explained
to them what's going on, the severity
of the situation and what might happen.
The sit with me and do a akia before my C-section
and then they pray with my wana, I almost die
and my pepe does not survive.
The Maori health Service help communicate what's happened,
provide support on what we can do.
Now they sit with me and understand,
but I'm extremely unwell and my peppi is gone.
But you see, I'm not a Maori wa heini.
As a paia I will not experience the same barriers.
More likely I will experience positive outcomes
and in the same pregnancy would be healthy living
with my happy and healthy pepe.
So how is removing health equity pro priority?
If we truly want a health system that is about patients,
then we need to focus on patients.
If you want to improve your health targets,
why not look at the patients
who are at the end of those targets?
This isn't ideological, it's common sense. Na,
Right? Thank you
so much. Any question from our members?
If not, this is a great submission.
Thank you so much for, for, for for your time.
And our next submitter is we got National Council of Women
of we got Eileen Ruiz and Matilda.
Good afternoon everyone.
Good afternoon. Ah, good afternoon.
My name is Bernice Williams.
I don't have a a I'll put my video on so you can see me.
Uh, there we are, we are. I'm present.
Uh, Yahi Marrie. Good afternoon.
My name is Bernice Williams.
I'm a member of the Parliamentary Watch Committee
of the National Council of Women of New Zealand, Tera or,
or N-C-W-N-Z for short.
With me today are Eileen Brown of N-C-W-N-Z, safety, health
and Wellbeing Action Hub
and Mati Jolan, providing admin support.
As always, we welcome the opportunity
to present at select committee.
We recognize this legislation, the PAA Healthy Futures Act
as a key legislative act for our New Zealand.
We begin today, however,
noting a disturbing trend we are seeing in bills introduced
by the co current government of rushed process
and a distinct reduction in if not complete absence
of appropriate consultation with key stakeholders
of grave Concern regarding this bill is the lack
of consultation with Maori N-C-W-N-Z finds
that both disturbing
and disingenuous that a bill purporting
to have at its core a goal to streamline
and clarify legislative pro provisions.
Supporting a meaningful Maori
voice in health decisions has not been supported
with any meaningful consultation with Maori.
Furthermore, we find this proposed amendment
limits significantly.
The role of Maori engagement
does not permit a meaningful role in planning and design
and relegates Maori to a role that is simply advisory.
This does not meet our TI
or WAITANGI obligations for partnership and participation.
Maori women face compounded health inequities,
removing consultation
with I iwi Maori Boards risks further losing their
voice in health planning.
We urge that the bill retain the Payor Healthy Futures Act.
Title that the name remain first.
The push away from using Tara Maori names is rejected
by N-C-W-N-C.
Language is important in Maori in terms
of advancing equity and Maori health.
The name is symbolically important in relation
to Maori health and to the goal
of addressing the distressing
and unacceptable inequities in health outcomes for Maori
and Arto New Zealand.
I will now hand over to my colleague Eileen.
Yeah, Kota Cara, thank you very much for the, um,
opportunity to submit on this important
piece of legislation.
We are concerned that, uh, of a number
of features about this bill.
The introduction of a new purpose to the act to ensure
that patients get timely access
to quality health services is supported by NZ ct,
N-N-C-W-N-Z.
And we, um, think that this is an important contribution,
but while supported it is not, it's enough in itself.
We oppose the appeal of the health principles
and the removal of health equity as a goal
and we call on the select committee
to retain these important principles
and especially health equity as a goal.
Equitable health outcomes benefit everybody.
An important, uh, principle in any legislations
when NCW looks at it is looking at the gender equity impacts
and how legislation will impact on gender
issues and gender needs.
The Women's health strategy required in the PAA Healthy
Futures Act is profoundly important to us.
We did a lot of work on that strategy and we welcomed it
and there's a lot of work still to do in implementing it.
The bill suggests
that the health strategies will be amended.
It's not clear, but it appears
that the health strategies will give effect
to health targets.
Strategies cannot be homogenized in this kind of way.
Distinct groups have different
and diverse needs for women's health.
The women's health strategy needs to be presents to continue
to acknowledge and meet the unique health needs of women
and girls, particularly in the area of reproductive health.
Maternal health dilution of any part
of the strategy will have a negative
effect for women's health.
Women rely on preventative health service including cervical
screening, maternal health and mental health.
And that's a central component
of the Women's health strategy.
We are deeply uneasy about what is intended here,
especially if the intention is a dilution
of the STR health strategies.
We seek clarification on this. Valuing the health workforce.
Many of our members and organizations are part
of the health workforce force.
Nurses, midwives, support workers,
women comprise nearly 70% of the health workforce
and 90% of the health workers
are in patient facing roles and are women.
Health systems are dependent on health workers are.
As New Zealand's health workforce, as I said,
is predominantly female.
The bill does not value the workforce
and it does appeal the health charter to moi Oranga.
We understand that that workforce charter, health charter,
sorry, was collaboratively dlec developed
and we think it's reactive and necessary
and wasteful actually to abandon it.
With all those values in there about people working together
about what's important in in the health system, uh,
and to attain good quality care,
we urge the Health Select Committee
to reconsider the health charter
or to suggest how it should be used
with tto Aura Health New Zealand, so that the place
and importance of valuing the workforce is recognized.
We're very uncomfortable
and very concerned to see health services
and the health workforces played as a political football.
This will not build the quality
and health service that we need.
And, uh, desperately and,
and, um, it, uh, actually desperately in need of.
One thing we mentioned, um,
in our submission was about health targets
and how these should be considered and looked at.
We support these and they have a place they,
but they must be approached with caution.
Cancer management, immunization of children,
emergency department admissions
and discharges, discharges, specialist services, electives
and access to primary healthcare as the healthcare target.
Access to primary healthcare are all unequivocally
supported, but they are not enough in themselves
for a quality management tool.
They are blunt tools
and they'll be effective only if they're part
of a whole f whole framework of monitoring, quality,
effectiveness and delivery of health services.
So while they are supported,
they are not supported without another context
and framework around them.
In conclusion, our our points that we have made, we stress,
again, meaningful consultation with such an important piece
of legislation, retaining health equity
as a central component of our health system,
improving Maori health outcomes, the importance
of a women's health strategy, valuing the workforce
and recognizing gendered makeup.
That is the conclusion of our submission,
our oral submission to you.
We welcome any questions. Thank
You. Thank you so much,
Arlene.
Is there any question from our members?
If it's not, thank you so much
for your submission today and thank you for your time.
Can we ask a question of you, uh,
because I think we've got a couple of moments.
Yes. You've got another two minutes.
Alright. Yes. So we, um, how,
how will the question about the health strategies,
which is central to a central question to, um,
NCW be addressed by the select committee,
if it's unclear
and the bill is unclear about
what is intended in the health strategies.
In fact, the, uh, regulatory impact statement, um, sounds
as if it was going to, um, not have them.
How will the select committee seek clarification on
the future of the health strategies
and what it means in the bill?
So what's happened is after the public hearing, um,
the select committee will draft a report back to the,
to the minister or the ministry as well.
And also if there's some of the question
or concern, which if we want to seek further security,
we will actually include it into the report as well.
But also sometime we also will send email also we send
another, uh, uh, communicator with our minister
or ministry to seek for further information.
Okay. Well thank you.
No worries. All right.
Thank you so much for your time today.
Thank you very much. Okay.
And now we got our submitter, um,
from t ran o
wrong if I, if I'm correct.
Um, apologies Mr. Chair. They don't appear to be online.
Oh, okay. Um, could we please jump forward to TE a Sure.
The N-Z-P-S-A
Sure.
N-S-P-S-A from, uh, Adam Franks. Mm-hmm.
Yes.
Hi Ellen.
Good. Can you Hear me Kia? Yes, I can hear you.
That's good. Sorry, I haven't got my picture on the face
so you can't see who I am, but I can see who everybody is.
I was expecting Mark to really have some introductory
around this, but I'm speaking from, um, uh, from my group to
who put forward this submission on behalf of us in health,
Maori in Health, and also all
of the Maori members across the organization.
The PSA. Uh, so look, I'd just like
to acknowledge everybody.
My name is Alan Franks.
I affiliate to UA
and I work at Maori Mental Health as
TU Hospital in Auckland.
Thank you for this opportunity to talk to our submission.
Our purpose in making this submission is
to follow up on our previous submission
that influenced the creation of the Payor Act of 22.
So you can see what our investment is with regard to the way
that the, uh, the way
that the amendments are going at the moment around
making the changes.
We also had a really significant part in De Modi,
or which is the health chart in New Zealand.
Prior to that, we made a submission making recommendations
to address the inequities of Maori and health.
And we had a really good response to that.
We are now in the position to kind of ub submit to object
to those proactive structures being dismantled
by the a admin amendments proposed.
Um, like I said, we are a whole order.
We're a committee that's represented across the country from
Ang to in cargo.
Um, we kind of represent 2,300 P Maori members
and we've registered and unregistered.
We have a strong presence in the organization, uh, also
with the Health Sector committee
and the Maori membership itself.
Um, our role really is to be accountable not only
to our members and also to our and Iwi,
but also to our colleagues,
our non Maori colleagues and employers.
Look, we oppose the changes to the PO order
and recommend that they not proceed.
And that's with regard to the repeal of te,
the minimization of TE in health documents
and the devaluation of the Maori voice
and presence in the health services.
And while we oppose these changes in the bill, the repeal
of TE undermines the collegial commitment made by Maori
and the collective health workforce
to navigate better relationships
and conditions for all staff about how to work together
to deliver better safe services in a safe system.
The language that we used to Maori
and po, what we use deliberately to be inclusive of a way
of a Maori way of thinking to compliment
that holistic approach to negate the long history
of negative statistics arising from miscommunication,
institutional racism and distrust.
These amendments that are proposed succeed
to take away our confidence to work meaningfully
with our colleagues and ourselves.
These amendments are breaches of Article two
and Article three of deterior.
Yes, the per of has deliberately minimized the sort
of goes on, talk to some of the other points, minimized
and discouraged in all health documents
and deemed not necessary for proprie, uh,
prioritizing system needs
or as a measure for qualitative relationships with non Maori
and Maori as staff and as consumers.
Maori are definitely integral to of all health entities,
and I must say Maori taxpayers.
In fact, TE provides grounding
and a point of reference for payor, which is
what we are kind of really discussing today.
Um, the business about having visibility of Tera helps
to define relative responsibilities
and obligations of the services, in fact to be the basis
for future systems of our entities.
And this is why we are so re we're really
agitated about the changes that are kind of proposed for te
what it seems to me is that it's putting te in a cupboard
and just bring it up
whenever they feel like it's appropriate.
Not good. The Maori voice in presence was the last
part in the discussion.
Um, the Maori voice is essential to sister the decline
of our negative statistics.
We work together in a collegial way
with our non-Maori there.
Um, and the amendments that are proposed
to remove the health sector principles doesn't
make us feel very good.
Uh, te takes
and to morio those things disappearing with the, uh,
with the amendments that takes away the considerations
for re Maori
and the MAGA in practice.
And that's our bread and butter money,
that's our bread and butter.
That's what gives us value within regard
to our service delivery to devalue usage of Tik Maori
and Mata Maori competencies demeans our presence
and worth with our colleagues
and allows unsafe cultural practices.
So the final thing is about the situation about the Iwi
Maori partnership boards.
What's happened here from our point of view that the ang
or the self-determination
of the Iwi Maori partnership boards has become reduced
by the fact that they are cited to become advisories
to another advisory committee.
The whole Maori advisory committee who,
and in another sense advises Health New Zealand
to advise the minister and ministry.
We know previously it was the advise the reporting line was
straight to the minister and the ministry,
and that was to act immediately on the things that concerned
the Iwi Maori partnership boards
where they were doing their commissioning work.
So here we are Maoris faced these
several distinct challenges.
The disregard for t Maori,
there is a clinical practices without cultural
considerations in the clinical setting, the practice
of Mato, Ranga, Maori
and cultural qualifications, not
val validated appropriately.
Um, and the other thing is the consistencies
for the cultural competency, which doesn't seem to be,
it doesn't be considered at all the way
that the amendments have, have course been set up.
And it also prevents our leadership style, uh,
working effectively around the recruitment process.
These issues are historically constant
and well known by Maori and
and health services, whether it be in water
or the community services, our hope
that the health reforms would deliver for Maori,
we are disappointed when aka high order was disestablished
without consultation the bill,
the changes in the bill go even further
removing Maori voice from the health system.
And that pretty much sums it up from the build dismantles,
the structures that were designed
to address the problems our members see every day.
We oppose the removal of the charter, the removal
of the health principles, the removal of requirements
for expertise on TE
and the reduced role of the Iwi Maori partnership boards.
These amendments would seem
to put us back into the seventies.
Thank you. Any questions?
Yes, we
Thank you very much for, um, bringing in the submission
and reiterating, You know, it's important as unions
that you are coming forward strongly in supporting many
of the sentiments that we've heard from professional groups,
from Iwi Maori partnership or Maori
and many of, um, the other bodies in the sector.
But from a PSA perspective, um, coming in strong
for the big membership that you have also, I was, um,
on the, for health this morning in re
with our striking nurses and healthcare workers
and, um, the ability of unions to be able
to elevate those concerns of the workforce is important.
Are you able to share in your, um, you know,
the central place of the workforce being able to inform
strategy and also policy work because it's, it's like an and
and I don't think, you know, I I reckon it's not like one
or the other that actually a strong workforce, um,
who has buy-in to what is being developed
actually means we adopt it more in practice, which is
what the health charter gave us, was the ability
for our voice to be heard
and then, um, implemented into the legislation.
So, uh, because we've, we've chosen to, um,
close the door now on this amendment, do you think
that there's a risk of losing, um, that important?
Well, I think so That's very important
and I agree with everything that you say the business about.
Um, it, it was the next step from TKA FA Water to follow up
with and unfortunately we need never had a real opportunity
there to put it into practice.
It is an aspirational document,
but it was there to kind
of really give us directions about the areas
that needed support more often inside that document there,
it favored things like diversity.
We've got a huge, uh, we've got a huge range
of people coming from overseas
that are all part of this document.
Um, and I think to throw it out, the throw it out
with the bath water, well you, you know,
how do you start again?
How do you start again with thinking there?
You just don't, so in a sense
that we've gotta start all over again with something there
that took on board the voices of a workforce,
not just from the PSA, but from all over the country
and different professions
and different parts of the mental health, mental health
and health services there.
So where the whole business around the, the amendments
and the changes that it's thrown people into a state
of chaos and there's conflict has come from that
and nobody can really,
people are really anxious about their jobs,
they're anxious about the fact
that if they step o out the line over the line
with this there, that things will come down heavily.
I think the last one was, um, Lester Levy.
He was kind of really, he was concerned
to make sure Temo did happen.
And I know that they were looking at it from the top down
management down to the workforce
and it just so happened that the workforce was once
that designed the whole, the whole, um, charter.
So coming back to your, your question about
how do we actually kind of look to, to incept it as,
as you know, as a, as an opportunity, oh
this is its own opportunity
and inside the, it addressed all those things
that I talked about there that, um,
that we are not happy about.
I, I can't sort of add anything more to that.
Alright. Thank you so much for submission.
Just 10 minutes just, um, very good.
Um, so now we got our link submitter, which uh,
is Adele Small?
Um, is Adele here
is good afternoon.
Adele,
can you hear us?
Yes, I can hear you Great. Do you just
Turn on my camera?
Sure. Hi,
I'm speaking on behalf of Tepe UA
mandated Charitable Trust representing seven UA AKA
and faha across the MidCentral region.
We represent the holder interests
of approximately 44,000 Maori.
We also hold the statutory Iwi Maori partnership board
function under the Healthy Futures Act 2022.
We strongly oppose the Healthy Futures Amendment
bill in its current form.
The bill represents a direct attack on Maori rights
and the based governance architecture that was hard won
through decades of advocacy.
We, we oppose the provisions of Section six of the act
because they erode existing ity protections
and undermine the ity compliance of the health sector.
The bill continues a troubling legislative trajectory,
beginning with the disestablishment of Takata
that reflects repeated and unacceptable breaches of tei.
It seeks to unilaterally weaken provisions
that gave practical effect to te
these changes dismantle TE based architecture developed in
genuine partnership with Iwi Hau
and once again, Maori are reduced
to passive stakeholders rather than our rightful role
as partners under, in short,
the bill strips away protections
and statutory functions that were designed to uphold
and give effect to Titi.
This is not simply a policy choice, it's a breach
of foundational commitments between Maori and Crown.
We also oppose the repeal of section seven
because it removes any statutory obligation
for the minister, the ministry,
and each health entity to be guided by principles
that promote equity in the health system.
These principles were critical.
They required the system to be accountable
for addressing persistent inequities and racism.
They ensured that fairness
and transparency were not optional, but were embedded.
Removing them creates real risks
that Maori health outcomes will worsen,
that inequities will deepen and become further entrenched
and that the health system will become less responsive
to Maori needs and aspirations.
Principles matter because they're the moral
and legal compass of the system,
their absence would mean no clear accountability for equity
and that is unacceptable.
We strongly oppose the repeal of Section 14 one N
and section 15 B of the Act
because it remove removes health New Zealand's mandatory
obligation to engage with the I Maori partnership boards.
This engagement cannot
and must not be left to discretion under it's an obligation.
We also oppose section 30, which weakens the functions
of IBS to engage directly with local Maori communities
to understand health needs and aspirations
and to communicate those insights through
to the Maori Advisory Committee.
This proposal is an insult to Iwi, hapu and whanau.
It centralizes authority into a crown created Maori voice
breaching te obligations
and silencing the diverse, locally grounded perspectives
that Im PBS were created to protect without strong mandated
ibs, Maori voices are not truly heard.
Local intelligence is lost.
Decision making becomes distant in outcomes
inevitably or worsen.
We therefore urge the select committee
to recommend the withdrawal of the spill.
Should Parliament choose to proceed regardless,
then at the very least, the amended law must retain
and strengthen statutory protections,
strengthen equity commitments
and accountability mechanisms, preserve
and reinforce the statutory functions
of iwi Maori partnership laws.
And it should also strengthen accountability
of the Al Maori Advisory Committee to iwi through I
Charitable Trust will continue to operate under as advocated
for UNA and as guaranteed by the treaty itself.
Thank you. Anyone got any questions?
Great. Thank you so much for your submission today,
KDA. Thank you
Ki So our submitter is
Mason from on behalf of PO Tech Public Healthcare,
ki Mason.
Sorry, Sam is not here. This, um, today.
So, um, I'm chair
of the subcommittee on behalf of Sam today.
No. Awesome. Yes. So thank you for, for comms.
You've got 10 minutes and the force is yours.
Thank you. Uh, KDA and Koto.
I'm Mason Liko, a representative
for Protect Public Healthcare.
We're a community led group
that is concerned about the state
of healthcare in New Zealand
and the current trajectory it seems
to be heading in as a group.
We are invested in preserving public
healthcare and raising awareness.
Whenever there is an opportunity,
the system could be undermined.
We feel that several amendments
to the healthy futures payor bill could allow
for such erosion of the public healthcare system.
As a patient with two chronic conditions, epilepsy
and arthritis, I engage with both the public
and private systems regularly
and this will likely never change.
I am personally invested in any changes made
to these systems as a group, though our full list
of concerns with this amendment bill
is in our written submission.
But I wish to draw attention to the consistent
and worrying ties to privatization.
This bill could entrench in the suggested amendment
to Health New Zealand's objectives by collaborating
with other agencies, organizations,
and individuals, including to avoid doubt.
Private healthcare providers legislates the use
of private healthcare system
where there is no apparent need for this change.
New Zealand's public healthcare system already leans on
private providers when care cannot be
provided in a timely manner.
And this has been done so for years.
The emphasis should not be on keeping private
providers in the equation through legislation.
But to invest first
and foremost into faltering public care as always.
And the instances where a patient experiences complications
beyond the capabilities of that private provider,
the public system is once again called to action.
We've had a patient submit their experience of interacting
with both the private and public systems.
After a chance, diagnosis of lung cancer leads
to complications with a scheduled bowel surgery.
So after having life altering surgery
to remove the lung tumor at the end of 2023,
it was mid 2024
before I was considered recovered enough
to undergo the bowel surgery that I needed
to remove part of my bowel.
My employment includes health insurance, so I was able
to book my bowel surgery privately
and six weeks later I had part of my bowel removed.
I knew as soon as I had regained consciousness though
that something was wrong.
Waking up in recovery is normally a calm controlled
experience, but I woke up to seeing a host
of people gathered around me, ambulance staff, nurses,
and a transport gurney beside the bed I was in.
I could also see the rear of an ambulance, not too far away,
fairly conscious at this point.
I was told that I was being transferred to a public hospital
due to the fact that the private hospital
had not scheduled ICU nurses due to a paperwork error
during the booking process six weeks prior.
Now, no, this was not due to surgery issues.
The surgery went well.
They simply did not check a box to say
that ICU care was needed due to the complexity associated
with my cancer surgery when planning.
Now this highlights how private services
do not deal with acute care.
So due to the ICU booking era in private,
the public system is then required to deal
with a very sick patient without the forward planning
advantage that private services enjoy.
This patient has comorbidities
and were fortunate enough to live in Christchurch
where a private facility with an ICU was available.
So even with that advantage,
the private system relies almost totally
on the public system to deal with unplanned
or unexpected outcomes.
A chance clerical error pushed them back into the public
system, likely delaying another patient's surgery.
The public system must take any patient
who requires acute care,
whether they walk into an ED department
or arrive in an ambulance from a private
facility like the one above.
This is why the public health systems funding
and resources should be prioritized
above any investment in private services.
Other ways this bill undermines the emphasis
of public care is by removing existing requirements
that health NZ board members have public sector
knowledge and expertise.
This would leave board appointments at the discretion
of the minister with the potential for a lack
of knowledge in the area.
They will be making critical decisions on public healthcare,
recommends that the amendment bill is
rejected in its entirety.
Thank you.
Thank you. So
any question from our members?
Firstly, um, you know, sorry to hear was your experience
with all this private, um, system and,
and you get pushed back to, I mean, your client, um,
and push back to the public system again.
Um, so, um, this, I think,
I think investing in the public system will
be the, the priorities.
They, they should be, but,
but your experiences, um, sometimes it's,
it's also benefit pe uh, benefit the patient by working
with the pay for as well,
Isn't it? It does.
Um, but in the chance where
the patient is aged, has diabetes,
has other situations like that,
and they're rural, they cannot go through,
um, an option like this.
They then have to go into the public system.
They're then on the waiting list, they're then waiting
for other people or they push other people down.
And we understand that, um, private is able
to take those, um, patients we're able,
but it's the priority.
The priority should not be on private taking those patients
that then undermines the public sector.
So when, when you are using the private sector,
do you find them they're more efficient because,
because we, we, we have some feedback that, you know,
the public system basically sometime can be training ground
for our junior doctors or, or healthcare workers as well.
Do you find the the private sector is more efficient
because they don't need to, uh, involve in, in any training
for, for, for new, new
Workers. I've had,
um, a um, this is something I wasn't gonna have
to mention, but I've had a urology, um,
surgery at Forte Health in Christchurch
that's a private, um, hospital.
And um, was asked if, um,
a trainee nurse would be able to sit in.
So I believe that training does go through
private sector at times as well.
So the basis of it is more efficient
because there is training not done there
is not really founded.
Um, the public sector is just as efficient
as soon as you hit the deck and you are running.
Sure. Yeah. As soon as you get to that top of
that wait list, you are there, you're seen
any follow up is done.
You are what is the priority at that point?
Yeah, there is at, if you, if the wait list was zero
and zero on both, you had a patient in both
that would get the exact same care.
Sure. That is entirely a system of, um, urgency.
All right. Thank you so much for your submission
and your, and your feedback today.
Thank you so much, Mason. Thank
You team. Thank you.
And um, the rest of the, uh, uh, the members
of the C committee, I will see you guys in the private
section.